cancer treatment fund for wales?
by tony beddow

share
click to share on facebook (opens in new window)click to share on twitter (opens in new window)click to share on pinterest (opens in new window)click to share on google+ (opens in new window)click to share on linkedin (opens in new window)
print
 
the national assembly for wales debated the cancer treatment fund on wednesday.

the welsh labour government is clear that it will not be replacing existing evidence-based system with a cancer drugs fund like that in england, which its own chair has admitted provides funding for cancer drugs which have ‘no impact on survival’ and ‘uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not’.

all medicines approved by the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) and the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) are made routinely available for patients in wales. medicines not approved by nice or awmsg are generally found to be too costly for the benefit obtained – they are not cost-effective.
we believe all cancer patients should be able to access the best possible treatments but for this to happen within the nhs budget, prices set by the pharmaceutical industry for new, life-extending drugs must come down. it is impossible to put a price on life but it is not impossible to put a fair price on drugs.
cancer patients in wales are more likely to receive evidence based, cost-effective medicines than in england and the welsh government is working hard to ensure that there is more consistency across the whole of wales.
wales invests in clinically-proven medicines for all by putting money into medicines which have been approved by the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) and the national institute for health and care excellence (nice).
all new medicines considered clinically and cost-effective by nice or awmsg are already routinely provided to patients by the nhs in wales. where drugs are not approved, mechanisms are in place to ensure individual patients have access when clinical exceptionality is demonstrated.
the all-wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) has carried out 119 appraisals of new medicines since april 2011, of which 105 have been recommended for use in wales.
as of october 2014, awmsg had appraised and recommended 19 new cancer medicines for use in nhs wales. these 19 cancer medicines cover 23 clinical indications and all are routinely available to eligible patients. only nine of these medicines are available in england via the cancer drugs fund.
a recent study by the university of bristol published in the british journal of cancer, about whether the english cancer drugs fund led to faster uptake of cost-effective drugs, concluded wales had a faster uptake of the drugs most recently launched and subsequently recommended by nice.
the research also found medicines considered not cost-effective by nice were more frequently prescribed in england than in wales and the cancer drugs fund in england did not expedite access to new cost-effective cancer medicines when compared to wales.
in september, wales became the first country in the uk to make the new pancreatic cancer drug abraxane available to all eligible patients in wales on the nhs – the only part of the uk.
the king’s fund has questioned the cancer drugs fund, as has the ‘british medical journal’, which questions the cancer drugs fund in terms of what it delivers.
the ‘british medical journal’, for example has pointed out that the cancer drugs fund is paying pharmaceutical companies over the odds for drugs that, in the past, would have cost the nhs a lot less.
the medical journal, the lancet is also on record as stating that “the cdf is a product of political opportunism and intellectual incoherence, which undermines the evidence-based approach to the allocation of nhs resources.” it also described the fund as “intellectually indefensible” because funds for other conditions such as dementia and multiple sclerosis had not been set up.
the welsh labour government’s policy on cancer drugs is based on clinical evidence – not free market ideology.
the welsh government believes that it is important that there is a system in place for ensuring that patients have access to drugs where their circumstances dictate that, which is why in wales we have the individual patient funding requests process, in order to do that.
however, simply throwing money at pharmaceutical companies, which is what the cancer drugs fund does, is not the way forward for wales.
welsh government action on cancer
spending

the nhs in wales is spending more than ever on cancer care, thanks to the welsh labour government.
spending on cancer has risen significantly since 2007 when the welsh government allocated £314.8m to cancer.
the latest figures – from the annual nhs expenditure programme budgets – show that spending on cancer care by the welsh nhs reached a record high at £360.9m in 2012-13.
spending per head of population on cancer in wales was £117.41 in 2012-13. this is £10 more per head than in england – spending per head on cancer was £107.21 in england in 2012-13
cancer targets
the welsh government has not set a formal target for first cancer outpatient appointments; we expect all health boards to see patients within 31 or 62 days depending on the particular pathway they are on (see below).
the health minister wrote to all health boards in wales in summer 2013 reminding them that having a first outpatient appointment in 14 days (10 working days) is best clinical practice and they should benchmark themselves against this internally.
performance against this standard is discussed at the regular quality and delivery meetings but it is not a published waiting time target in wales.
the current cancer waiting times targets in wales are:

everyone referred by their gp via the urgent suspected cancer route is put on a 62-day pathway, during which all investigations (tests) are carried out. this is the same in wales and in england.
the target in wales is for 95% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days from gp referral. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 87.4% of patients were seen within that time.
the target in england is for 85% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available), 84.1% of patients were seen within this target.
there is also a 31-day cancer pathway in england and wales.
for patients newly diagnosed with cancer not via the urgent route the target in wales is that 98% should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 98.1% of patients were treated within 31 days.
in england, figures for the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available) show 97.8% of people treated began first definitive treatment within 31 days of receiving their diagnosis.

the spleen (from greek σπλήν—splḗn[1]) is an organ found in virtually all vertebrates. similar in structure to a large lymph node, it acts primarily as a blood filter.
the spleen plays important roles in regard to red blood cells (also referred to as erythrocytes) and the immune system.[2] it removes old red blood cells and holds a reserve of blood, which can be valuable in case of hemorrhagic shock, and also recycles iron. as a part of the mononuclear phagocyte system, it metabolizes hemoglobin removed from senescent red blood cells (erythrocytes). the globin portion of hemoglobin is degraded to its constitutive amino acids, and the heme portion is metabolized to bilirubin, which is removed in the liver.[3]
the spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. a study published in 2009 using mice found that the red pulp of the spleen forms a reservoir that contains over half of the body's monocytes.[4] these monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (such as the heart after myocardial infarction), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing.[4][5][6] the spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections.[7]
in humans the spleen is brownish in color and is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.

the small intestine develops from the midgut of the primitive gut tube.[14] by the fifth week of embryological life, the ileum begins to grow longer at a very fast rate, forming a u-shaped fold called the primary intestinal loop. the loop grows so fast in length that it outgrows the abdomen and protrudes through the umbilicus. by week 10, the loop retracts back into the abdomen. between weeks six and ten the small intestine rotates anticlockwise, as viewed from the front of the embryo. it rotates a further 180 degrees after it has moved back into the abdomen. this process creates the twisted shape of the large intestine

the small intestine receives a blood supply from the coeliac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery. these are both branches of the aorta. the duodenum receives blood from the coeliac trunk via the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and from the superior mesenteric artery via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. these two arteries both have anterior and posterior branches that meet in the midline and anastomose. the jejunum and ileum receive blood from the superior mesenteric artery.[13] branches of the superior mesenteric artery form a series of arches within the mesentery known as arterial arcades, which may be several layers deep. straight blood vessels known as vasa recta travel from the arcades closest to the ileum and jejunum to the organs themselves.

staffing[edit]
in the year ending at march 2017, there were 1.187 million staff in the nhs, 1.9% more than in march 2016.[41]

in the same year, there were 691,000 nurses registered in the uk, down 1,783 from the previous year. however, this is the first time nursing numbers have fallen since 2008 and there are 13,000 more nurses in the nhs than in 2010. poor working conditions, staffing levels and workload also dissatisfaction with the quality of patient care were given as reasons as were poor pay and benefits. saffron cordery of nhs providers said, these figures provide further evidence of the severe workforce problems nhs trusts face. burseries to nursing students are to be stopped forcing nurses to pay for their training, it is expected this will also be a discouragement.[42] commentators are increasingly arguing that staffing shortages are endangering the sustinability of the nhs. there are too few health workers, nurses and midwives, doctors are also in short supply. hospitals, community trusts and mental health trusts all face shortages.[43] some general practitioners are losing sleep because they worry work pressure may have lead them to miss something that puts a patient at risk.[44] in hospitals junior doctors are sometimes forced to do work beyond what they have been trained for. this is stressful for doctors and puts patients at risk. overworked consultants do not have the time to carry out proper supervision of less qualified doctors.[45]

effect of brexit[edit]
the plan to exit the european union will affect physicians from eu countries, about 11% of the physician workforce.[46] many of these physicians feel unwelcome and are considering leaving the uk if brexit happens, as they have doubts that they and their families can live in the country.[46] a survey suggests 60% are considering leaving.[47] record numbers of eu nationals (17,197 eu staff working in the nhs which include nurses and doctors) left last year. the figures, put together by nhs digital, lead to calls to reassure european workers over their future in the uk.[48] eu nurses registering to work in the uk are down 96% since the brexit vote aggravating shortages of nurses. janet davies of the royal college of nursing, said, “we rely on the contributions of eu staff and this drop in numbers could have severe consequences for patients and their families. our nursing workforce is in a state of crisis. across our health service, from a&e to elderly care, this puts patients at serious risk.

proprietary operating system[edit]
in 2001 the nhs entered into a licensing deal with microsoft, ignoring the advice of some of its own it specialists that had recommended investing in linux instead.[54] concerns about the vulnerability of nhs computer systems to cyber-attack have been expressed since at least 2016.[55] nhs computer systems have been subject to cyber attacks of which one in may 2017 was notable.[56] the may 2017 attack lead to the cancellation of at least 6912 appointments including operations, 139 suspected cancer patients had urgent referrals cancelled. the number of gp appointments cancelled, the number of ambulances diverted from a&e departments unable to treat some patients, the number of delays in receiving information like test results are unknown. north korea is strongly suspected of starting the attack. the attack happened on a friday in may. a cyberattack on a monday in winter would be even more damaging.[57] nhs computers have been vulnerable because a minority still use or used windows xp, an outdated system that originated in 2001, and one which microsoft stopped supporting with security patches. complacency among nhs staff and among government departments that pay for computer security are blamed. unless systems are upgraded, more cyber attacks are feared.[58] dr david wrigley of the british medical association said, “it’s been known about for years, that the software isn’t up to date across the nhs, so it’s not unpredictable that this situation should have arisen. but it’s disappointing that funding hasn’t been given to upgrade the system. it needs urgent action by politicians.”

performance[edit]
in 2014 the nuffield trust and the health foundation produced a report comparing the performance of the nhs in the four countries of the uk since devolution in 1999. they included data for the north east of england as an area more similar to the devolved areas than the rest of england. they found that there was little evidence that any one country was moving ahead of the others consistently across the available indicators of performance. there had been improvements in all four countries in life expectancy and in rates of mortality amenable to health care. despite the hotly contested policy differences between the four countries there was little evidence, where there was comparable data, of any significant differences in outcomes. the authors also complained about the increasingly limited set of comparable data on the four health systems of the uk.[18]

rising social costs have led to a significant increase in the time between patients being declared medically fit and finding social care placements in many cases.[19]

political criticism[edit]
the performance of the nhs in wales has been used by uk prime minister david cameron as an illustration of what he views as mismanagement by welsh labour. criticism is chiefly about waiting times for diagnostics and surgery, the absence of a cancer drugs fund and the fact that very few private providers are used to keep waiting lists down. the welsh border was described by david cameron as 'a line between life and death'.[20] andrew r. t. davies claimed that the labour-run welsh nhs is fast becoming one of the conservatives' key electoral assets ahead of next year's general election. he launched a survey of attitudes to the nhs in 2014 which concluded that the welsh held the nhs dear to their hearts, though almost two-thirds of respondents felt the performance of the welsh nhs had declined in recent years. the survey found a wide range of problems caused by a lack of resources. staff complained that whistleblowers risked professional suicide and some patients said complaints or concerns were not taken seriously by nhs managers[21]

nhs wales is governed by what its critics describe as a post-war structure: with seven separate regional health boards, each dominated by labour supporters – the taffia.[22]

defenders of the nhs in wales point out that it operates on £1,900 per person compared with the north east of england which is similar to wales in terms of need and gets £2,100 per person. while some waiting lists such as orthopaedic surgery may be longer in wales some other aspects of the service such as cancer care are better in wales. english figures are not collected and reported on the same basis as welsh ones.[23] 90% patients who used welsh hospitals and gps in 2013 were satisfied or very satisfied with their care. in contrast across britain as a whole only 60% said they were satisfied with the nhs.[24]

in october 2014 the daily mail claimed that around half of welsh cancer sufferers must wait six weeks or more for many scans and tests yet in england ... the comparable figure is less than 6%. the welsh government responded by pointing out that targets for timely treatment of cancer were the same in wales as in england, for example that 98% not on the urgent pathway should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. on the latest figures the performance in wales was actually slightly better than in england. wales has a specific waiting time target for diagnostic tests, different from england – the maximum wait for access to specified diagnostic tests is 8 weeks. in august 2014 24,107 patients were waiting more than 8 weeks for diagnostic tests in wales; 70% receive their tests within the target time.[25] it defending the decision not to set up a cancer drugs fund as in england, on the ground that the fund's own chair has admitted it provides funding for cancer drugs which have 'no impact on survival' and 'uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not' and pointed out that the all-wales medicines strategy group got new drugs such as sativex approved for use in wales more quickly than the national institute for health and care excellence in england.[26]

in february 2016 the organisation for economic co-operation and development published a review which concluded that performance of the nhs in wales was little different from that in the rest of the uk. they described performance across the uk as fairly mediocre saying that great policies were not being translated into great practices. they suggested that gps should be more involved in health boards and that resources should be shifted out of hospitals.[27]

complaints[edit]
it was reported that there had been 10,395 recorded staff complaints about staffing levels between 2012 and 2015. the highest number of complaints (3,609) related to cardiff and vale university health board. the government response was that since 1999, the total number of staff working in the welsh nhs had increased by a third. in 2015 there were 2,000 gps working in the nhs in wales, the highest number ever and an increase of 11% since 2003. the number of nursing, midwifery and health visiting staff increased from 28,157 in 2010 to 28,300 in 2014.[

the systems are 98.8% funded from general taxation and national insurance contributions, plus small amounts from patient charges for some services.[23][24] about 10% of gdp is spent on health and most is spent in the public sector.[25] the money to pay for the nhs comes directly from taxation. the 2008/9 budget roughly equates to a contribution of £1,980 per person in the uk.[26]

when the nhs was launched in 1948 it had a budget of £437 million (roughly £9 billion at today’s prices).[27] in 2008/9 it received over 10 times that amount (more than £100 billion). in 1955/6 health spending was 11.2% of the public services budget. in 2015/6 it was 29.7%.[28] this equates to an average rise in spending over the full 60-year period of about 4% a year once inflation has been taken into account. under the blair government investment levels increased to around 6% a year on average. since 2010 spending growth has been constrained to just over 1% a year.[28]

some 60% of the nhs budget is used to pay staff. a further 20% pays for drugs and other supplies, with the remaining 20% split between buildings, equipment, training costs, medical equipment, catering and cleaning. nearly 80% of the total budget is distributed by local trusts in line with the particular health priorities in their areas.[29] since 2010, there has been a cap of 1% on pay rises for staff continuing in the same role. unions representing doctors, dentists, nurses and other health professionals have called on the government to end the cap on health service pay, claiming the cap is damaging the health service and damaging patient care.[30] the pay rise is likely to be below the level of inflation and to mean a real-terms pay cut.[31] the house of commons library did research showing that real-terms nhs funding per head will fall in 2018-19, and stay the same for two years afterwards.

criticism[edit]
research indicates that society does not support the prioritisation of cancer drugs over other treatments.[11] the financial times attacked the fund in december 2014 as a populist gesture that gives the impression of benefiting patients, but in fact rewards poor quality drugs while benefiting a handful of pharmaceutical companies at the expense of the taxpayer and the full range of nhs patients, complaining that it undermined the national institute for health and care excellence.[12] james le fanu writing in the daily telegraph said this mechanism for diverting taxpayers’ money to enhance, to little or no purpose, the profits of big pharma might be more aptly named “the drug company fund”.[13] in february 2015 york university researchers reported that the fund represented particularly poor value, diverting money from other patient services and that for every healthy year gained by this fund, five qalys could be lost across the nhs.[14]

in december 2014 andy burnham announced that a labour government would replace the fund with a cancer treatment fund which would pay not only for innovative cancer drugs, but also for surgery and radiotherapy. it could mean increased access to advanced forms of radiotherapy such as intensity modulated radiotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiotherapy.[15]

in july 2015 the independent cancer taskforce established by nhs england proposed reform of the fund, which the taskforce said was “no longer sustainable or desirable… in its current form”.[16]

professor karl claxton, a health economist at the university of york, says that the fund should be scrapped because the money would be better used on 21,000 patients with heart, lung and gastro-intestinal diseases who are denied cost effective evidence based treatment,[17] arguing that the principal beneficiary of the fund is 'big pharma'.[18]

in september 2015 the national audit office reported that no data had been collected on the 74,000 patients whose treatment had been funded, at a cost of nearly £1 billion, so it was impossible to discover whether the treatment had been effective.[19]

the public accounts committee published a report on the fund in february 2016 which concluded that there was no evidence the fund was benefiting patients, extending lives or a good use of taxpayers' money.[20]

prof richard sullivan, of king's college london and dr ajay aggarwal of the london school of hygiene & tropical medicine published a study in the annals of oncology in april 2017. he concluded that the initiative as initially established was a huge waste of money and a major policy error. the researchers studied the 47 treatments that were being funded by january 2015, of which only 18% met internationally recognised criteria for being deemed clinically beneficial. for those drugs where there was some evidence of benefit, the average was an extra 3.2 months of survival. the majority of patients were exposed to unpleasant side effects for no benefit. £1.27 billion was spent on the fund during the period studied.[21] no usable data was collected on what happened to patients whose treatment was funded - such as measuring how long they lived, their quality of life or side-effects. there was no consideration of the relative merits of surgery and radiotherapy.[22]

the national health service (nhs) is the collective name as well as the name used individually for each of the four public health services in the united kingdom: the national health service in england, nhs scotland, nhs wales, and health and social care in northern ireland. they were established together in 1948 as one of the major social reforms following the second world war. the founding principles were being comprehensive, universal and free at the point of delivery.[1] today, each provides a comprehensive range of health services which are free for people ordinarily resident in the united kingdom apart from dental treatment and optical care.[2] (the english nhs also requires patients to pay prescription charges though there is a range of exemptions from these charges.)

each of the uk's health service systems operates independently, and is politically accountable to the relevant government: the scottish government, welsh government, the northern ireland executive, and the uk government which is responsible for england's nhs. nhs wales was originally part of the same structure as england until powers over the nhs in wales were firstly transferred to the secretary of state for wales in 1969 and thereafter, in 1999, to the welsh assembly as part of welsh devolution. however, some functions might be routinely performed by one health service on behalf of another. for example, northern ireland has no high-security psychiatric hospitals and thus depends on using hospitals in great britain, routinely at carstairs hospital in scotland for male patients and rampton secure hospital in england for female patients.[3] similarly, patients in north wales use specialist facilities in manchester and liverpool which are much closer than facilities in cardiff, and more routine services at the countess of chester hospital. there have been issues about cross-border payments.[4]

growing numbers of patients taken to hospital by ambulance are having to wait an hour or more before they are handed over to a&e staff for treatment, nhs england figures show.

in the week to last sunday, 17 december, one in seven such patients faced a delay of at least 30 minutes in the back of an ambulance or an area of the hospital where the crew look after them, up from one in eight the week before.

hospitals are finding it impossible to stick to tough rules brought in for this winter by nhs england and nhs improvement requiring that no patient should have to wait more than 15 minutes.


alarm over sharp rise in ambulance patient deaths in england
 read more
in a further sign of the extra pressure the nhs is under this winter, the number of times a&e units had to temporarily divert patients elsewhere because they could not cope with the demand for care rose from 25 the previous week to 30.

gateshead hospital trust had to do so nine times, including four times on 13 december alone, while the main trust providing acute care in worcestershire did it eight times.

the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “patients should be under no illusions: there has been an appalling winter downturn across our nhs over the past month. despite the heroic efforts of our brilliant nhs staff, it’s unacceptable that so many patients have been stuck in the back of ambulances for such a long time.”

in the week to 17 december, 14,323 patients in england (15% of the total) waited at least half an hour before they were handed over for a&e care, up from 11,852 the previous week, a 21% increase.

of those patients, 10,899 were unable to access a&e care for between 30 and 60 minutes, up from 9,515 the week before, and 3,424 waited at least an hour, up from 2,337.

a total of 95,392 patients arrived by ambulance at hospital emergency departments in england last week.

some trusts fared significantly worse than the england average: at least one in three patients in 11 trusts waited 30 minutes or more before being admitted to a&e.

according to official nhs figures 93% of ambulance patients arriving at lancashire teaching hospitals nhs foundation trust and half of ambulance patients attending united lincolnshire hospitals nhs trust had to wait 30 minutes or more.


ashworth said that during the first month of winter a total of 46,993 patients had had to wait in the back of ambulances for more than 30 minutes, and 9,775 had had to wait for longer than an hour. “there has been an 86% rise in the number of delays for over one hour in just the past two weeks as the cold snap has hit,” he said.

the chief nursing officer for england’s summit 2018 offers an opportunity for the senior nursing, midwifery and care leadership community to explore how to deal with current challenges and use their collective leadership and ambition to shape the future of our health and care system.

the summit will include international speakers and leaders from across the health and care system in england and will take place on 7 and 8 march 2018 at the acc liverpool.

the general and acute bed occupancy rate in hospitals rose from 94.6% to 95%, far above the 85% level experts consider the maximum to maintain safe patient care.

slightly fewer beds – 1,071 a day on average – were closed last week as a result of norovirus, the winter vomiting bug. but nhs england said the number of incidents was growing.

for example, norovirus forced northumbria healthcare in the north-east to close and seal seven wards at four of its hospitals. “every year we are affected by norovirus but this is the worst it’s been for a few years. all our main sites have people with the bug on them in some shape or form,” said dr jeremy rushmer, the trust’s medical director.

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb said: “these figures show the nhs is under huge strain as we enter the christmas period. hospitals are suffering from a severe lack of beds and a&es are already under intolerable pressure.

“no patient should ever have to wait in pain in the back of an ambulance outside a&e, yet this is now becoming a routine occurrence across the country.”
nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp)
most people would be shocked to know that around 22,000 people with diabetes die early every year. type 2 diabetes is a leading cause of preventable sight loss in people of working age and is a major contributor to kidney failure, heart attack, and stroke.

there are currently 3.4 million people with type 2 diabetes in england with around 200,000 new diagnoses every year. while type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented and is not linked to lifestyle, type 2 diabetes is largely preventable through lifestyle changes.

one in six of all people in hospital have diabetes – while diabetes is often not the reason for admission, they often need a longer stay in hospital, are more likely to be re admitted and their risk of dying is higher.

as well as the human cost, type 2 diabetes treatment accounts for just under nine per cent of the annual nhs budget. this is around £8.8 billion a year.

there are currently five million people in england at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. if these trends persist, one in three people will be obese by 2034 and one in 10 will develop type 2 diabetes.

there is strong international evidence which demonstrates how behavioural interventions, which support people to maintain a healthy weight and be more active, can significantly reduce the risk of developing the condition.

the healthier you: nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp) identifies those at high risk and refers them onto a behaviour change programme.

the nhs dpp is a joint commitment from nhs england, public health england and diabetes uk.

we are currently piloting a digital stream of the nhs diabetes prevention programme.
nhs england is an executive non-departmental public body (ndpb) of the department of health.

nhs england oversees the budget, planning, delivery and day-to-day operation of the commissioning side of the nhs in england as set out in the health and social care act 2012.[1] it holds the contracts for gps and nhs dentists. the secretary of state publishes, annually, a document known as the mandate which specifies the objectives which the board should seek to achieve. national health service (mandate requirements) regulations are published each year to give legal force to the mandate.

nhs england employs around 6,500 staff in 50 sites around england. most of its staff previously worked for the decommissioned primary care trusts and strategic health authorities.
nhs england is the operating name of the nhs commissioning board and, before that, the nhs commissioning board authority.[2] it was set up as a special health authority of the nhs in october 2011 as the forerunner to becoming an ndpb on 1 april 2013.[3] it was renamed nhs england on 26 march 2013.[4] its legal name remains the nhs commissioning board.

sir david nicholson who became chief executive at the establishment of the board retired at the end of march 2014 and was replaced by simon stevens. one of stevens' first acts was to announce a restructure of its 27 area teams in response to a requirement to reduce running costs which would reduce staffing by around 500.[5] the 27 teams outside london were reduced to 12 in 2015.[6]

system management[edit]
it produced a planning document the five year forward view in october 2014 which envisaged development of new models to suit local needs.

nhs england in conjunction with the other central regulators established what is called a success regime in south and mid essex, north cumbria and north east and western devon in june 2015. it is intended to tackle “deep rooted and systemic issues that previous interventions have not tackled across [a] whole health and care economy”.[7]

in 2016 it organised the geographical division of england into 44 sustainability and transformation plan areas with populations between 300,000 and 3 million. these areas were locally agreed between nhs trusts, local authorities and clinical commissioning groups. a leader was appointed for each area, who is to be responsible for the implementation of the plans which are to be agreed by the component organisations. they will be working across organisational boundaries to help build a consensus for transformation and the practical steps to deliver it.[8]

in april 2017 it introduced a capped expenditure process applied to nhs commissioners and providers in the 13 areas across england with the largest budget deficits. it is intended to reduce their spending by around £500 million, and health leaders were told to ‘think the unthinkable’.[9]

operational pressures escalation levels framework[edit]
in october 2016 it introduced a new system for the management of operational difficulties in english hospitals, replacing the rather poorly defined system of red and black alerts which were locally defined. there are 4 opel levels. level 1 is a state of normality. level 4 is a major crisis requiring external intervention either regionally or nationally.[10] this is intended, among other things, to enable comparisons of trends over time and between different areas. [11]

primary care[edit]
applications by gps to reduce their catchment area are dealt with by nhs england. requests to reduce the number of patients eligible to join a practice and in some cases also to deregister existing patients, have risen with 26 made between april and october 2014 compared to 30 for the whole of 2013/14. only 15 have been approved.[12]

in november 2014 mr justice popplewell declared that nhs england “has acted unlawfully by reason of its failure to make arrangements for the involvement of patients in primary care commissioning decisions as required by the national health service act 2006”. the case involved the decision to scrap minimum practice income guarantee. richard stein, a partner at leigh day, said the declaration could mean that patients would have to be involved in discussions on changes to the gp contract.[13]

nhs england awarded a 4-year contract to capita to become sole provider of administrative services including payment administration, management of medical records, and eligibility lists for practitioners for gps, opticians and dentists across the uk in june 2015.[14]

see also general medical services

information technology[edit]
the organisation was reported to be developing a strategy to support the use of personal health records in june 2015. this, it is hoped, could achieve up to £3.4 billion in annual efficiency savings by 2020.[15] in april 2016 it published an index of digital maturity, where each of the 239 nhs trusts assessed its own readiness, capabilities and enabling infrastructure.[16][17]

specialist commissioning[edit]
specialised services are those provided in relatively few hospitals, accessed by comparatively small numbers of patients but with catchment populations of usually more than one million. these services tend to be located in specialised hospital trusts that can recruit a team of staff with the appropriate expertise. nhs england is responsible for commissioning £15.6 billion of specialised services and for dealing with individual funding requests in respect of the specialist services it commissions.

it was criticised for delays in deciding on a policy for the prescription of everolimus in the treatment of tuberous sclerosis. twenty doctors addressed a letter to the board in support of the charity tuberous sclerosis association saying around 32 patients with critical need, whose doctors believe everolimus treatment is their best or only option, have no hope of access to funding. most have been waiting many months. approximately half of these patients are at imminent risk of a catastrophic event (renal bleed or kidney failure) with a high risk of preventable death.[18] in may 2015 it was reported that luke henry and stephanie rudwick, the parents of a child suffering from tuberous sclerosis were trying to sell their home in brighton to raise the money to pay for treatment for their daughter bethany who has tumours on her brain, kidneys and liver and suffers from up to fifty epileptic fits a day.[19]

it authorises and pays for treatment of narcolepsy with sodium oxybate by means of individual funding requests on the basis of exceptional circumstances. in may 2016 the high court ordered nhs england to provide funding to treat a teenager with severe narcolepsy. the judge criticised their “thoroughly bad decision” and “absurd” policy discriminating against the girl when hundreds of other nhs patients already receive the drug. the department of health is also paying for the treatment of people whose narcolepsy was caused by the swine flu vaccine pandemrix in 2009-10 by means of private prescriptions outside the national health service.[20]

arbitration[edit]
the organisation's responsibilities include arbitration in disputes between clinical commissioning groups and nhs trusts.[21]
clinical commissioning groups (ccgs) are nhs organisations set up by the health and social care act 2012 to organise the delivery of nhs services in england.[1] 211 groups were established in 2013 and there was resistance to any proposals for mergers between groups although gateshead ccg, newcastle north & east ccg and newcastle west ccg merged in 1 april 2015. during 2016 it appeared that further mergers would be permitted and an official procedure was published in november 2016 by nhs england.[2] during 2017 further proposals for merger appeared. 83 ccgs were sharing chief officers in march 2017, which may be a precursor to merger. if all those led to merger there would be 174 groups.[3]

to a certain extent they replace primary care trusts (pcts), though some of the staff and responsibilities moved to local authority public health teams when pcts ceased to exist in april 2013. services directly provided by pcts were reorganised through the transforming community services programme.
ccgs are clinically led groups that include all of the gp groups in their geographical area. the aim of this is to give gps and other clinicians the power to influence commissioning decisions for their patients.[1][4]

ccgs are overseen by nhs england (including its regional offices and area teams). these structures manage primary care commissioning, including holding the nhs contracts for gp practices nhs.[5]

each ccg has a constitution and is run by its governing body. each has to have an accountable officer responsible for the ccg’s duties, functions, finance and governance. most ccgs initially appointed former pct managers to these posts.[6] only a quarter of accountable officers were gps in october 2014, but 80% of ccg chairs were gps.[7] only half of gp practices said they felt involved in ccg decision making processes.[8] the health and social care act 2012 provides that the areas specified in the constitutions of clinical commissioning groups together cover the whole of england, and do not coincide or overlap. each ccg is responsible for persons who are provided with primary medical services by a member of the group, and persons who usually reside in the group’s area and are not provided with primary medical services by a member of any clinical commissioning group.

e-reward, an online pay research service, analysed the pay of more than 2,500 managers at the 211 ccgs in england in 2015. they reported that 56% of 225 top executives – chief officers and chief finance officers – were paying themselves more than the salary range recommended by nhs england of £95,000 to £125,000 a year.[9]

unite the union surveyed the 3,392 ccg board members in 2015 and reported that 513 were directors of private healthcare companies: 140 owned such businesses and 105 carried out external work for them. more than 400 ccg board members were shareholders in such companies.[10] the kings fund and the nuffield trust ran a survey of gps in six areas of england in 2016 and found that more than 70% were at least “somewhat” engaged with the work of their ccg, though only 20% of those without a formal role in their ccg said they could influence the work of their ccg if they chose to.[11]

lakeside healthcare applied to move from corby ccg (where it had 2/3 of the registered population) to nene ccg in 2015, but nene refused to accept it.[12]

during 2017 mergers between ccgs began, having previously been forbidden.[13] gps in staffordshire submitted a vote of no confidence in their local ccgs in protest against a proposed merger. the merger between liverpool, south sefton and southport and formby ccgs was stopped while and investigation into liverpool ccg's governance and management of conflicts of interest was carried out, leading to the resignation of several of its leaders. there were also similar investigations in hackney and crawley.[14]

in october 2017, it was announced that brighton and hove clinical commissioning group was to merge with brighton and hove city council, to form a health and social care integration board: the merge, commencing in april 2018 and culminating in a full merger a year later, is intended to prevent the duplication of work and streamline provision of health and social care within the city.
a national health service trust is an organisation within the english nhs generally serving either a geographical area or a specialised function (such as an ambulance service). in any particular location there may be several trusts involved in the different aspects of healthcare for a resident.
nhs trusts were established under the national health service and community care act 1990 and were set up in five waves. each one was established by a statutory instrument.

the trusts are not trusts in the legal sense but are in effect public sector corporations. each trust is headed by a board consisting of executive and non-executive directors, and is chaired by a non-executive director. there were about 2,200 non-executives across 470 organisations in the nhs in england in 2015.[1] non-executive directors are recruited by open advertisement. all trusts (foundation trusts and those which have yet to reach foundation trust status) are regulated by nhs improvement. board members are, from november 2014, subject to a fit and proper person test.

all trust boards are required to have an audit committee consisting only of non-executive directors, on which the chair may not sit. this committee is entrusted not only with supervision of financial audit, but of systems of corporate governance within the trust. hospital board members have a duty to act on signals of poor performance on quality and safety data, and yet many of the papers presented to them have been found to be lacking good data visualisations.[2]

future development[edit]
in september 2015 jeremy hunt was reported as saying “i think we do have too many trusts as independent organisations in a context where mergers between trusts and the establishment of chains of hospitals were being discussed.[3] subsequently simon stevens made it clear that he did not expect the remaining nhs trusts to become foundation trusts, saying we are frankly kidding ourselves if we think the non-fts are going to pass the kinds of criteria that have been set by monitor.[4]

the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.


the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.

shifting the balance of power
contents next page previous page
background
2.21 the nhs plan sets out a vision for service designed around the patient - a service of high quality and national standards which is fast, convenient and uses modern methods to provide care where and when it is needed. such a service will not only be designed around patients but also be responsive to them, offer them choices and involve them in decision making and planning.

the secretary of state announced on 25 april 2001 a programme to shift the balance of power within the nhs away from central government and towards front line staff and their patients. under the arrangements set out in secretary of state's shifting the balance of power speech local clinicians and managers, working in primary care trusts and nhs trusts, were to be empowered to ensure that local services reflect the needs of the local community. 'shifting the balance of power' is about putting patients and staff absolutely at the heart of the nhs by empowering them and changing the culture and structure of the nhs to reflect this.

preparing for change
in july 2001 the department published shifting the balance of power within the nhs - securing delivery, (2.29) detailing the proposed changes and inviting responses in a discussion period. over 400 responses were received from the service as well as the major national representative bodies. there was general support for the direction of change, although there were many queries about the detailed implementation of the proposals. shifting the balance of power - the next steps(2.30) was published in january 2002. this document addressed the major issues raised in the discussion period. it set out the framework and principles for the changes but - inline with its own philosophy - left the practical arrangements, the how, when and where of working arrangements and service delivery - to be decided locally. consultation on the boundaries of the new health authorities took place in autumn 2001 and the new boundaries were subsequently confirmed along with the chairs and chief executives (designate). franchise plans were then developed by the chief executives outlining how they intended to run their organisations, based on a specification set by the department.

structural changes
much progress has been made in developing and implementing the structural changes:

england's 95 previous health authorities were abolished on 1 april 2002.
much of the planning and commissioning work previously carried out by these health authorities has been passed to just over 300 primary care trusts, which by 2004 will be controlling over 75 per cent of nhs funding.
28 new health authorities (set to become strategic health authorities in october 2002, subject to legislation) serving populations of around 1.5 million were also established on 1 april, responsible for developing strategy and performance managing pcts and nhs trusts, so as to secure delivery and consistency of approach. they will in effect manage the nhs locally on behalf of the department.
the department of health has also been re-focusing to reflect the new structure. four new directorates of health and social care became operational on 1 april with responsibility for working directly with the nhs and performance managing the new health authorities while the regional offices are to be abolished.
as a result of these changes, £100 million will be freed up by 2004 to spend on childcare facilities for nhs staff as an aid to recruitment and retention.

delivering the nhs plan
plans for devolving power to locally run services - within a framework of clear national standards - were strengthened in the department's delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform (2.31) document, published in april 2002. this document builds on the structural and cultural changes of shifting the balance of power.

further information
further information is available on the dh web-site at:

department of health 'shifting the balance of power: securing delivery'
department of health 'shifting the balance of power: the next steps'
department of health 'delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform.

planet health cymru launched at walking and cycling conference
thursday, 4 november 2010
planet health cymru, a new web resource for all those working in the built and natural environment and health, was launched at the third annual walking and cycling conference.
 
the resource encourages collaborative working and provides information and signposting to the planning sector; allowing them to incorporate health considerations in their decision making on future developments.
 
it was developed by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales, managed by public health wales.
 
planet health cymru (planning for environment, transport and health) www.planethealthcymru.org seeks to provide a ‘one-stop-shop’ for people working in health, the green and urban environments, design and architecture, regeneration, sustainability, transport and community development amongst others.
 
the welsh assembly government aims to encourage physical activity and give due prominence to walking and cycling through development and infrastructure planning and decision making. the new website is one means of supporting this aim, set out in planning policy wales and creating an active wales.
 
the work has been led by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales working with a wide-ranging advisory board which includes representatives from the welsh assembly government, royal town planners institute, welsh local government association, design commission wales, institute of civil engineers, centre for regeneration excellence in wales, the transport consortia and countryside council for wales.
 
su mably, consultant in public health for public health wales who oversaw the development of the project commented, “we have the opportunity to learn from the lessons of the past, for example the tower blocks built in the 1950s and 1960s, when not much consideration was given to how these homes would impact on residents’ mental, social and physical health.
 
“planet health cymru is an excellent tool which will allow all those working in planning, regeneration, transport, design and health to consider the health of the local people when developing new projects.”
 
the minister for environment, sustainability and housing, jane davidson said: “today’s walking and cycling conference is all about encouraging people in wales to make healthy and sustainable travel choices.
 
“if we are to succeed in this ambition we must make walking and cycling as safe and easy as possible. the planning of our villages, towns and cities is key to this and i am delighted that the planet cymru web resource will help to ensure that health considerations are fully factored into the planning process.”
 
dr tony jewell, chief medical officer for wales, added: “it is important to give people information to enable them to make informed choices in an effort to improve their health and well-being. it is crucial to make health choices, easy choices. how we plan and build our towns and cities is key to making easier choices – making it easier for people to walk or cycle to the shops or to school, rather than use the car, or to have local spaces to walk or relax.

public health wales is the national public health agency in wales and exists to protect and improve health and wellbeing and reduce health inequalities for people in wales. we are part of the nhs and report to the cabinet secretary for health, well-being and sport in the welsh government.

with a strong board, 1,700 staff and a budget of £106 million, the organisation employs the majority of the specialist public health resource in wales. 

we provide advice, expertise and specialist services to welsh government (working across departments), the seven health boards, two nhs trusts, 22 local authorities, other agencies and to the population of wales.
 
we provide the public health knowledge, scientific expertise and intelligence to lead transformational change and to drive a focus on ensuring that we deliver tangible improvements in health and wellbeing outcomes and reduce health inequalities in wales. 

health and local government are among the devolved areas in wales and therefore, working nationally and locally, public health wales has access to both policy levers and local delivery systems by working closely with our partners. 

each of the seven health boards in wales employs a director of public health who is supported by the critical mass of expertise employed by public health wales at the local and community level and who, under an honorary contract, manages locally based public health wales staff. 

public health wales, health boards and local authorities work closely together to promote public health in their areas and jointly identify and set the local strategic agenda in partnership with communities, housing, education, police, fire and rescue and the voluntary sector. 
 
 
 cartrefu, which means to reside in welsh, is a four year programme run by gwanwyn which aims to improve access to quality arts experiences for older people in residential care.

between 2015 and 2017 age cymru recruited 16 professional artists in four different fields: performing arts, visual arts, words and music. these artists each delivered eight 8-week residencies across the length and breadth of wales, introducing a mix of established art forms and new activities residents may not have had the chance to experience before.

cartrefu has been a huge success and over the past two years our artists have delivered over 1,000 art workshops in care homes around wales. age cymru was able to offer these workshops entirely for free due to the generous support from the arts council of wales and the baring foundation.

in 2017 cartrefu re-launched with a brand new team of 12 artists, this time working in care homes for 12 weeks. with our second team of cartrefu artists we want to push the boundaries of what has been attempted in care homes before, and hope to inspire bold and striking new art work from the residents our artists work with.

we hope that cartrefu will foster a greater appreciation of the arts among care home staff as they work with our artists. we want care home staff to gain more confidence and acquire new skills, sharing and practicing them in their daily work with residents.

cartrefu has designed an activity pack for care homes, based on the work our first cartrefu team of artists developed in care homes. the activity pack feature 20 simple but effective activities for care home staff to run with residents and are free to all care homes in wales.

to obtain your free pack, please get in touch with cartrefu project coordinator reg noyes

evaluation report
we recently launched our evalution report in the senedd on tuesday 10 october 2017. 

the evaluation, undertaken by dr katherine algar skaife from the dementia research centre wales at bangor university, found that cartrefu increased the well-being of residents, improved their social skills, and even helped some of them regain long lost abilities like using a knife and fork. it also found that the project had a positive impact on the care home staff with many reporting improved attitudes to residents, especially those with dementia. one carer said “it made me realise residents are more capable than one might give them credit for.”

the evaluation also found that the project developed a group of artists who are now better equipped to work with vulnerable older people in care settings and that the lives of the residents are more like to be reflected in future work undertaken by the artists. you can download a copy of the evaluation report below.

if you'd like more information about our cartrefu project, please contact us or visit the gwanwyn website.

 


funding of clinical commissioning groups[edit]
nhs england allocates funding (of £69.5 billion in 2016/7) to ccgs in accordance with a funding formula. until 2016 progress towards the amount indicated by the formula from the historical allocation was very slow, and ccgs which were above their allocation did not actually suffer a reduction. from april 2016 however ccgs with more than 10% above their fair share will receive flat cash - an effective reduction. this will also ensure than no ccg is more than 5% below its target allocation in 2016/7
an nhs england spokesman said: the recent cold snap has seen hospitals put under pressure, but they are generally coping. additional services and beds will be coming online over the next few weeks funded by the [£337m] winter budget cash released by the government. staff are working hard to ensure ambulance handovers are as smooth as possible.”
taken together, the four national health services in 2015-16 employed around 1.6 million people with a combined budget of £136.7 billion.[5] in 2014 the total health sector workforce across the uk was 2,165,043. this broke down into 1,789,586 in england, 198,368 in scotland, 110,292 in wales and 66,797 in northern ireland.


cancer treatment fund for wales?
by tony beddow

share
click to share on facebook (opens in new window)click to share on twitter (opens in new window)click to share on pinterest (opens in new window)click to share on google+ (opens in new window)click to share on linkedin (opens in new window)
print
 
the national assembly for wales debated the cancer treatment fund on wednesday.

the welsh labour government is clear that it will not be replacing existing evidence-based system with a cancer drugs fund like that in england, which its own chair has admitted provides funding for cancer drugs which have ‘no impact on survival’ and ‘uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not’.

all medicines approved by the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) and the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) are made routinely available for patients in wales. medicines not approved by nice or awmsg are generally found to be too costly for the benefit obtained – they are not cost-effective.
we believe all cancer patients should be able to access the best possible treatments but for this to happen within the nhs budget, prices set by the pharmaceutical industry for new, life-extending drugs must come down. it is impossible to put a price on life but it is not impossible to put a fair price on drugs.
cancer patients in wales are more likely to receive evidence based, cost-effective medicines than in england and the welsh government is working hard to ensure that there is more consistency across the whole of wales.
wales invests in clinically-proven medicines for all by putting money into medicines which have been approved by the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) and the national institute for health and care excellence (nice).
all new medicines considered clinically and cost-effective by nice or awmsg are already routinely provided to patients by the nhs in wales. where drugs are not approved, mechanisms are in place to ensure individual patients have access when clinical exceptionality is demonstrated.
the all-wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) has carried out 119 appraisals of new medicines since april 2011, of which 105 have been recommended for use in wales.
as of october 2014, awmsg had appraised and recommended 19 new cancer medicines for use in nhs wales. these 19 cancer medicines cover 23 clinical indications and all are routinely available to eligible patients. only nine of these medicines are available in england via the cancer drugs fund.
a recent study by the university of bristol published in the british journal of cancer, about whether the english cancer drugs fund led to faster uptake of cost-effective drugs, concluded wales had a faster uptake of the drugs most recently launched and subsequently recommended by nice.
the research also found medicines considered not cost-effective by nice were more frequently prescribed in england than in wales and the cancer drugs fund in england did not expedite access to new cost-effective cancer medicines when compared to wales.
in september, wales became the first country in the uk to make the new pancreatic cancer drug abraxane available to all eligible patients in wales on the nhs – the only part of the uk.
the king’s fund has questioned the cancer drugs fund, as has the ‘british medical journal’, which questions the cancer drugs fund in terms of what it delivers.
the ‘british medical journal’, for example has pointed out that the cancer drugs fund is paying pharmaceutical companies over the odds for drugs that, in the past, would have cost the nhs a lot less.
the medical journal, the lancet is also on record as stating that “the cdf is a product of political opportunism and intellectual incoherence, which undermines the evidence-based approach to the allocation of nhs resources.” it also described the fund as “intellectually indefensible” because funds for other conditions such as dementia and multiple sclerosis had not been set up.
the welsh labour government’s policy on cancer drugs is based on clinical evidence – not free market ideology.
the welsh government believes that it is important that there is a system in place for ensuring that patients have access to drugs where their circumstances dictate that, which is why in wales we have the individual patient funding requests process, in order to do that.
however, simply throwing money at pharmaceutical companies, which is what the cancer drugs fund does, is not the way forward for wales.
welsh government action on cancer
spending

the nhs in wales is spending more than ever on cancer care, thanks to the welsh labour government.
spending on cancer has risen significantly since 2007 when the welsh government allocated £314.8m to cancer.
the latest figures – from the annual nhs expenditure programme budgets – show that spending on cancer care by the welsh nhs reached a record high at £360.9m in 2012-13.
spending per head of population on cancer in wales was £117.41 in 2012-13. this is £10 more per head than in england – spending per head on cancer was £107.21 in england in 2012-13
cancer targets
the welsh government has not set a formal target for first cancer outpatient appointments; we expect all health boards to see patients within 31 or 62 days depending on the particular pathway they are on (see below).
the health minister wrote to all health boards in wales in summer 2013 reminding them that having a first outpatient appointment in 14 days (10 working days) is best clinical practice and they should benchmark themselves against this internally.
performance against this standard is discussed at the regular quality and delivery meetings but it is not a published waiting time target in wales.
the current cancer waiting times targets in wales are:

everyone referred by their gp via the urgent suspected cancer route is put on a 62-day pathway, during which all investigations (tests) are carried out. this is the same in wales and in england.
the target in wales is for 95% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days from gp referral. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 87.4% of patients were seen within that time.
the target in england is for 85% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available), 84.1% of patients were seen within this target.
there is also a 31-day cancer pathway in england and wales.
for patients newly diagnosed with cancer not via the urgent route the target in wales is that 98% should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 98.1% of patients were treated within 31 days.
in england, figures for the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available) show 97.8% of people treated began first definitive treatment within 31 days of receiving their diagnosis.

the spleen (from greek σπλήν—splḗn[1]) is an organ found in virtually all vertebrates. similar in structure to a large lymph node, it acts primarily as a blood filter.
the spleen plays important roles in regard to red blood cells (also referred to as erythrocytes) and the immune system.[2] it removes old red blood cells and holds a reserve of blood, which can be valuable in case of hemorrhagic shock, and also recycles iron. as a part of the mononuclear phagocyte system, it metabolizes hemoglobin removed from senescent red blood cells (erythrocytes). the globin portion of hemoglobin is degraded to its constitutive amino acids, and the heme portion is metabolized to bilirubin, which is removed in the liver.[3]
the spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. a study published in 2009 using mice found that the red pulp of the spleen forms a reservoir that contains over half of the body's monocytes.[4] these monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (such as the heart after myocardial infarction), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing.[4][5][6] the spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections.[7]
in humans the spleen is brownish in color and is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.

the small intestine develops from the midgut of the primitive gut tube.[14] by the fifth week of embryological life, the ileum begins to grow longer at a very fast rate, forming a u-shaped fold called the primary intestinal loop. the loop grows so fast in length that it outgrows the abdomen and protrudes through the umbilicus. by week 10, the loop retracts back into the abdomen. between weeks six and ten the small intestine rotates anticlockwise, as viewed from the front of the embryo. it rotates a further 180 degrees after it has moved back into the abdomen. this process creates the twisted shape of the large intestine

the small intestine receives a blood supply from the coeliac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery. these are both branches of the aorta. the duodenum receives blood from the coeliac trunk via the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and from the superior mesenteric artery via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. these two arteries both have anterior and posterior branches that meet in the midline and anastomose. the jejunum and ileum receive blood from the superior mesenteric artery.[13] branches of the superior mesenteric artery form a series of arches within the mesentery known as arterial arcades, which may be several layers deep. straight blood vessels known as vasa recta travel from the arcades closest to the ileum and jejunum to the organs themselves.

staffing[edit]
in the year ending at march 2017, there were 1.187 million staff in the nhs, 1.9% more than in march 2016.[41]

in the same year, there were 691,000 nurses registered in the uk, down 1,783 from the previous year. however, this is the first time nursing numbers have fallen since 2008 and there are 13,000 more nurses in the nhs than in 2010. poor working conditions, staffing levels and workload also dissatisfaction with the quality of patient care were given as reasons as were poor pay and benefits. saffron cordery of nhs providers said, these figures provide further evidence of the severe workforce problems nhs trusts face. burseries to nursing students are to be stopped forcing nurses to pay for their training, it is expected this will also be a discouragement.[42] commentators are increasingly arguing that staffing shortages are endangering the sustinability of the nhs. there are too few health workers, nurses and midwives, doctors are also in short supply. hospitals, community trusts and mental health trusts all face shortages.[43] some general practitioners are losing sleep because they worry work pressure may have lead them to miss something that puts a patient at risk.[44] in hospitals junior doctors are sometimes forced to do work beyond what they have been trained for. this is stressful for doctors and puts patients at risk. overworked consultants do not have the time to carry out proper supervision of less qualified doctors.[45]

effect of brexit[edit]
the plan to exit the european union will affect physicians from eu countries, about 11% of the physician workforce.[46] many of these physicians feel unwelcome and are considering leaving the uk if brexit happens, as they have doubts that they and their families can live in the country.[46] a survey suggests 60% are considering leaving.[47] record numbers of eu nationals (17,197 eu staff working in the nhs which include nurses and doctors) left last year. the figures, put together by nhs digital, lead to calls to reassure european workers over their future in the uk.[48] eu nurses registering to work in the uk are down 96% since the brexit vote aggravating shortages of nurses. janet davies of the royal college of nursing, said, “we rely on the contributions of eu staff and this drop in numbers could have severe consequences for patients and their families. our nursing workforce is in a state of crisis. across our health service, from a&e to elderly care, this puts patients at serious risk.

proprietary operating system[edit]
in 2001 the nhs entered into a licensing deal with microsoft, ignoring the advice of some of its own it specialists that had recommended investing in linux instead.[54] concerns about the vulnerability of nhs computer systems to cyber-attack have been expressed since at least 2016.[55] nhs computer systems have been subject to cyber attacks of which one in may 2017 was notable.[56] the may 2017 attack lead to the cancellation of at least 6912 appointments including operations, 139 suspected cancer patients had urgent referrals cancelled. the number of gp appointments cancelled, the number of ambulances diverted from a&e departments unable to treat some patients, the number of delays in receiving information like test results are unknown. north korea is strongly suspected of starting the attack. the attack happened on a friday in may. a cyberattack on a monday in winter would be even more damaging.[57] nhs computers have been vulnerable because a minority still use or used windows xp, an outdated system that originated in 2001, and one which microsoft stopped supporting with security patches. complacency among nhs staff and among government departments that pay for computer security are blamed. unless systems are upgraded, more cyber attacks are feared.[58] dr david wrigley of the british medical association said, “it’s been known about for years, that the software isn’t up to date across the nhs, so it’s not unpredictable that this situation should have arisen. but it’s disappointing that funding hasn’t been given to upgrade the system. it needs urgent action by politicians.”

performance[edit]
in 2014 the nuffield trust and the health foundation produced a report comparing the performance of the nhs in the four countries of the uk since devolution in 1999. they included data for the north east of england as an area more similar to the devolved areas than the rest of england. they found that there was little evidence that any one country was moving ahead of the others consistently across the available indicators of performance. there had been improvements in all four countries in life expectancy and in rates of mortality amenable to health care. despite the hotly contested policy differences between the four countries there was little evidence, where there was comparable data, of any significant differences in outcomes. the authors also complained about the increasingly limited set of comparable data on the four health systems of the uk.[18]

rising social costs have led to a significant increase in the time between patients being declared medically fit and finding social care placements in many cases.[19]

political criticism[edit]
the performance of the nhs in wales has been used by uk prime minister david cameron as an illustration of what he views as mismanagement by welsh labour. criticism is chiefly about waiting times for diagnostics and surgery, the absence of a cancer drugs fund and the fact that very few private providers are used to keep waiting lists down. the welsh border was described by david cameron as 'a line between life and death'.[20] andrew r. t. davies claimed that the labour-run welsh nhs is fast becoming one of the conservatives' key electoral assets ahead of next year's general election. he launched a survey of attitudes to the nhs in 2014 which concluded that the welsh held the nhs dear to their hearts, though almost two-thirds of respondents felt the performance of the welsh nhs had declined in recent years. the survey found a wide range of problems caused by a lack of resources. staff complained that whistleblowers risked professional suicide and some patients said complaints or concerns were not taken seriously by nhs managers[21]

nhs wales is governed by what its critics describe as a post-war structure: with seven separate regional health boards, each dominated by labour supporters – the taffia.[22]

defenders of the nhs in wales point out that it operates on £1,900 per person compared with the north east of england which is similar to wales in terms of need and gets £2,100 per person. while some waiting lists such as orthopaedic surgery may be longer in wales some other aspects of the service such as cancer care are better in wales. english figures are not collected and reported on the same basis as welsh ones.[23] 90% patients who used welsh hospitals and gps in 2013 were satisfied or very satisfied with their care. in contrast across britain as a whole only 60% said they were satisfied with the nhs.[24]

in october 2014 the daily mail claimed that around half of welsh cancer sufferers must wait six weeks or more for many scans and tests yet in england ... the comparable figure is less than 6%. the welsh government responded by pointing out that targets for timely treatment of cancer were the same in wales as in england, for example that 98% not on the urgent pathway should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. on the latest figures the performance in wales was actually slightly better than in england. wales has a specific waiting time target for diagnostic tests, different from england – the maximum wait for access to specified diagnostic tests is 8 weeks. in august 2014 24,107 patients were waiting more than 8 weeks for diagnostic tests in wales; 70% receive their tests within the target time.[25] it defending the decision not to set up a cancer drugs fund as in england, on the ground that the fund's own chair has admitted it provides funding for cancer drugs which have 'no impact on survival' and 'uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not' and pointed out that the all-wales medicines strategy group got new drugs such as sativex approved for use in wales more quickly than the national institute for health and care excellence in england.[26]

in february 2016 the organisation for economic co-operation and development published a review which concluded that performance of the nhs in wales was little different from that in the rest of the uk. they described performance across the uk as fairly mediocre saying that great policies were not being translated into great practices. they suggested that gps should be more involved in health boards and that resources should be shifted out of hospitals.[27]

complaints[edit]
it was reported that there had been 10,395 recorded staff complaints about staffing levels between 2012 and 2015. the highest number of complaints (3,609) related to cardiff and vale university health board. the government response was that since 1999, the total number of staff working in the welsh nhs had increased by a third. in 2015 there were 2,000 gps working in the nhs in wales, the highest number ever and an increase of 11% since 2003. the number of nursing, midwifery and health visiting staff increased from 28,157 in 2010 to 28,300 in 2014.[

the systems are 98.8% funded from general taxation and national insurance contributions, plus small amounts from patient charges for some services.[23][24] about 10% of gdp is spent on health and most is spent in the public sector.[25] the money to pay for the nhs comes directly from taxation. the 2008/9 budget roughly equates to a contribution of £1,980 per person in the uk.[26]

when the nhs was launched in 1948 it had a budget of £437 million (roughly £9 billion at today’s prices).[27] in 2008/9 it received over 10 times that amount (more than £100 billion). in 1955/6 health spending was 11.2% of the public services budget. in 2015/6 it was 29.7%.[28] this equates to an average rise in spending over the full 60-year period of about 4% a year once inflation has been taken into account. under the blair government investment levels increased to around 6% a year on average. since 2010 spending growth has been constrained to just over 1% a year.[28]

some 60% of the nhs budget is used to pay staff. a further 20% pays for drugs and other supplies, with the remaining 20% split between buildings, equipment, training costs, medical equipment, catering and cleaning. nearly 80% of the total budget is distributed by local trusts in line with the particular health priorities in their areas.[29] since 2010, there has been a cap of 1% on pay rises for staff continuing in the same role. unions representing doctors, dentists, nurses and other health professionals have called on the government to end the cap on health service pay, claiming the cap is damaging the health service and damaging patient care.[30] the pay rise is likely to be below the level of inflation and to mean a real-terms pay cut.[31] the house of commons library did research showing that real-terms nhs funding per head will fall in 2018-19, and stay the same for two years afterwards.

criticism[edit]
research indicates that society does not support the prioritisation of cancer drugs over other treatments.[11] the financial times attacked the fund in december 2014 as a populist gesture that gives the impression of benefiting patients, but in fact rewards poor quality drugs while benefiting a handful of pharmaceutical companies at the expense of the taxpayer and the full range of nhs patients, complaining that it undermined the national institute for health and care excellence.[12] james le fanu writing in the daily telegraph said this mechanism for diverting taxpayers’ money to enhance, to little or no purpose, the profits of big pharma might be more aptly named “the drug company fund”.[13] in february 2015 york university researchers reported that the fund represented particularly poor value, diverting money from other patient services and that for every healthy year gained by this fund, five qalys could be lost across the nhs.[14]

in december 2014 andy burnham announced that a labour government would replace the fund with a cancer treatment fund which would pay not only for innovative cancer drugs, but also for surgery and radiotherapy. it could mean increased access to advanced forms of radiotherapy such as intensity modulated radiotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiotherapy.[15]

in july 2015 the independent cancer taskforce established by nhs england proposed reform of the fund, which the taskforce said was “no longer sustainable or desirable… in its current form”.[16]

professor karl claxton, a health economist at the university of york, says that the fund should be scrapped because the money would be better used on 21,000 patients with heart, lung and gastro-intestinal diseases who are denied cost effective evidence based treatment,[17] arguing that the principal beneficiary of the fund is 'big pharma'.[18]

in september 2015 the national audit office reported that no data had been collected on the 74,000 patients whose treatment had been funded, at a cost of nearly £1 billion, so it was impossible to discover whether the treatment had been effective.[19]

the public accounts committee published a report on the fund in february 2016 which concluded that there was no evidence the fund was benefiting patients, extending lives or a good use of taxpayers' money.[20]

prof richard sullivan, of king's college london and dr ajay aggarwal of the london school of hygiene & tropical medicine published a study in the annals of oncology in april 2017. he concluded that the initiative as initially established was a huge waste of money and a major policy error. the researchers studied the 47 treatments that were being funded by january 2015, of which only 18% met internationally recognised criteria for being deemed clinically beneficial. for those drugs where there was some evidence of benefit, the average was an extra 3.2 months of survival. the majority of patients were exposed to unpleasant side effects for no benefit. £1.27 billion was spent on the fund during the period studied.[21] no usable data was collected on what happened to patients whose treatment was funded - such as measuring how long they lived, their quality of life or side-effects. there was no consideration of the relative merits of surgery and radiotherapy.[22]

the national health service (nhs) is the collective name as well as the name used individually for each of the four public health services in the united kingdom: the national health service in england, nhs scotland, nhs wales, and health and social care in northern ireland. they were established together in 1948 as one of the major social reforms following the second world war. the founding principles were being comprehensive, universal and free at the point of delivery.[1] today, each provides a comprehensive range of health services which are free for people ordinarily resident in the united kingdom apart from dental treatment and optical care.[2] (the english nhs also requires patients to pay prescription charges though there is a range of exemptions from these charges.)

each of the uk's health service systems operates independently, and is politically accountable to the relevant government: the scottish government, welsh government, the northern ireland executive, and the uk government which is responsible for england's nhs. nhs wales was originally part of the same structure as england until powers over the nhs in wales were firstly transferred to the secretary of state for wales in 1969 and thereafter, in 1999, to the welsh assembly as part of welsh devolution. however, some functions might be routinely performed by one health service on behalf of another. for example, northern ireland has no high-security psychiatric hospitals and thus depends on using hospitals in great britain, routinely at carstairs hospital in scotland for male patients and rampton secure hospital in england for female patients.[3] similarly, patients in north wales use specialist facilities in manchester and liverpool which are much closer than facilities in cardiff, and more routine services at the countess of chester hospital. there have been issues about cross-border payments.[4]

growing numbers of patients taken to hospital by ambulance are having to wait an hour or more before they are handed over to a&e staff for treatment, nhs england figures show.

in the week to last sunday, 17 december, one in seven such patients faced a delay of at least 30 minutes in the back of an ambulance or an area of the hospital where the crew look after them, up from one in eight the week before.

hospitals are finding it impossible to stick to tough rules brought in for this winter by nhs england and nhs improvement requiring that no patient should have to wait more than 15 minutes.


alarm over sharp rise in ambulance patient deaths in england
 read more
in a further sign of the extra pressure the nhs is under this winter, the number of times a&e units had to temporarily divert patients elsewhere because they could not cope with the demand for care rose from 25 the previous week to 30.

gateshead hospital trust had to do so nine times, including four times on 13 december alone, while the main trust providing acute care in worcestershire did it eight times.

the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “patients should be under no illusions: there has been an appalling winter downturn across our nhs over the past month. despite the heroic efforts of our brilliant nhs staff, it’s unacceptable that so many patients have been stuck in the back of ambulances for such a long time.”

in the week to 17 december, 14,323 patients in england (15% of the total) waited at least half an hour before they were handed over for a&e care, up from 11,852 the previous week, a 21% increase.

of those patients, 10,899 were unable to access a&e care for between 30 and 60 minutes, up from 9,515 the week before, and 3,424 waited at least an hour, up from 2,337.

a total of 95,392 patients arrived by ambulance at hospital emergency departments in england last week.

some trusts fared significantly worse than the england average: at least one in three patients in 11 trusts waited 30 minutes or more before being admitted to a&e.

according to official nhs figures 93% of ambulance patients arriving at lancashire teaching hospitals nhs foundation trust and half of ambulance patients attending united lincolnshire hospitals nhs trust had to wait 30 minutes or more.


ashworth said that during the first month of winter a total of 46,993 patients had had to wait in the back of ambulances for more than 30 minutes, and 9,775 had had to wait for longer than an hour. “there has been an 86% rise in the number of delays for over one hour in just the past two weeks as the cold snap has hit,” he said.

the chief nursing officer for england’s summit 2018 offers an opportunity for the senior nursing, midwifery and care leadership community to explore how to deal with current challenges and use their collective leadership and ambition to shape the future of our health and care system.

the summit will include international speakers and leaders from across the health and care system in england and will take place on 7 and 8 march 2018 at the acc liverpool.

the general and acute bed occupancy rate in hospitals rose from 94.6% to 95%, far above the 85% level experts consider the maximum to maintain safe patient care.

slightly fewer beds – 1,071 a day on average – were closed last week as a result of norovirus, the winter vomiting bug. but nhs england said the number of incidents was growing.

for example, norovirus forced northumbria healthcare in the north-east to close and seal seven wards at four of its hospitals. “every year we are affected by norovirus but this is the worst it’s been for a few years. all our main sites have people with the bug on them in some shape or form,” said dr jeremy rushmer, the trust’s medical director.

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb said: “these figures show the nhs is under huge strain as we enter the christmas period. hospitals are suffering from a severe lack of beds and a&es are already under intolerable pressure.

“no patient should ever have to wait in pain in the back of an ambulance outside a&e, yet this is now becoming a routine occurrence across the country.”
nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp)
most people would be shocked to know that around 22,000 people with diabetes die early every year. type 2 diabetes is a leading cause of preventable sight loss in people of working age and is a major contributor to kidney failure, heart attack, and stroke.

there are currently 3.4 million people with type 2 diabetes in england with around 200,000 new diagnoses every year. while type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented and is not linked to lifestyle, type 2 diabetes is largely preventable through lifestyle changes.

one in six of all people in hospital have diabetes – while diabetes is often not the reason for admission, they often need a longer stay in hospital, are more likely to be re admitted and their risk of dying is higher.

as well as the human cost, type 2 diabetes treatment accounts for just under nine per cent of the annual nhs budget. this is around £8.8 billion a year.

there are currently five million people in england at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. if these trends persist, one in three people will be obese by 2034 and one in 10 will develop type 2 diabetes.

there is strong international evidence which demonstrates how behavioural interventions, which support people to maintain a healthy weight and be more active, can significantly reduce the risk of developing the condition.

the healthier you: nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp) identifies those at high risk and refers them onto a behaviour change programme.

the nhs dpp is a joint commitment from nhs england, public health england and diabetes uk.

we are currently piloting a digital stream of the nhs diabetes prevention programme.
nhs england is an executive non-departmental public body (ndpb) of the department of health.

nhs england oversees the budget, planning, delivery and day-to-day operation of the commissioning side of the nhs in england as set out in the health and social care act 2012.[1] it holds the contracts for gps and nhs dentists. the secretary of state publishes, annually, a document known as the mandate which specifies the objectives which the board should seek to achieve. national health service (mandate requirements) regulations are published each year to give legal force to the mandate.

nhs england employs around 6,500 staff in 50 sites around england. most of its staff previously worked for the decommissioned primary care trusts and strategic health authorities.
nhs england is the operating name of the nhs commissioning board and, before that, the nhs commissioning board authority.[2] it was set up as a special health authority of the nhs in october 2011 as the forerunner to becoming an ndpb on 1 april 2013.[3] it was renamed nhs england on 26 march 2013.[4] its legal name remains the nhs commissioning board.

sir david nicholson who became chief executive at the establishment of the board retired at the end of march 2014 and was replaced by simon stevens. one of stevens' first acts was to announce a restructure of its 27 area teams in response to a requirement to reduce running costs which would reduce staffing by around 500.[5] the 27 teams outside london were reduced to 12 in 2015.[6]

system management[edit]
it produced a planning document the five year forward view in october 2014 which envisaged development of new models to suit local needs.

nhs england in conjunction with the other central regulators established what is called a success regime in south and mid essex, north cumbria and north east and western devon in june 2015. it is intended to tackle “deep rooted and systemic issues that previous interventions have not tackled across [a] whole health and care economy”.[7]

in 2016 it organised the geographical division of england into 44 sustainability and transformation plan areas with populations between 300,000 and 3 million. these areas were locally agreed between nhs trusts, local authorities and clinical commissioning groups. a leader was appointed for each area, who is to be responsible for the implementation of the plans which are to be agreed by the component organisations. they will be working across organisational boundaries to help build a consensus for transformation and the practical steps to deliver it.[8]

in april 2017 it introduced a capped expenditure process applied to nhs commissioners and providers in the 13 areas across england with the largest budget deficits. it is intended to reduce their spending by around £500 million, and health leaders were told to ‘think the unthinkable’.[9]

operational pressures escalation levels framework[edit]
in october 2016 it introduced a new system for the management of operational difficulties in english hospitals, replacing the rather poorly defined system of red and black alerts which were locally defined. there are 4 opel levels. level 1 is a state of normality. level 4 is a major crisis requiring external intervention either regionally or nationally.[10] this is intended, among other things, to enable comparisons of trends over time and between different areas. [11]

primary care[edit]
applications by gps to reduce their catchment area are dealt with by nhs england. requests to reduce the number of patients eligible to join a practice and in some cases also to deregister existing patients, have risen with 26 made between april and october 2014 compared to 30 for the whole of 2013/14. only 15 have been approved.[12]

in november 2014 mr justice popplewell declared that nhs england “has acted unlawfully by reason of its failure to make arrangements for the involvement of patients in primary care commissioning decisions as required by the national health service act 2006”. the case involved the decision to scrap minimum practice income guarantee. richard stein, a partner at leigh day, said the declaration could mean that patients would have to be involved in discussions on changes to the gp contract.[13]

nhs england awarded a 4-year contract to capita to become sole provider of administrative services including payment administration, management of medical records, and eligibility lists for practitioners for gps, opticians and dentists across the uk in june 2015.[14]

see also general medical services

information technology[edit]
the organisation was reported to be developing a strategy to support the use of personal health records in june 2015. this, it is hoped, could achieve up to £3.4 billion in annual efficiency savings by 2020.[15] in april 2016 it published an index of digital maturity, where each of the 239 nhs trusts assessed its own readiness, capabilities and enabling infrastructure.[16][17]

specialist commissioning[edit]
specialised services are those provided in relatively few hospitals, accessed by comparatively small numbers of patients but with catchment populations of usually more than one million. these services tend to be located in specialised hospital trusts that can recruit a team of staff with the appropriate expertise. nhs england is responsible for commissioning £15.6 billion of specialised services and for dealing with individual funding requests in respect of the specialist services it commissions.

it was criticised for delays in deciding on a policy for the prescription of everolimus in the treatment of tuberous sclerosis. twenty doctors addressed a letter to the board in support of the charity tuberous sclerosis association saying around 32 patients with critical need, whose doctors believe everolimus treatment is their best or only option, have no hope of access to funding. most have been waiting many months. approximately half of these patients are at imminent risk of a catastrophic event (renal bleed or kidney failure) with a high risk of preventable death.[18] in may 2015 it was reported that luke henry and stephanie rudwick, the parents of a child suffering from tuberous sclerosis were trying to sell their home in brighton to raise the money to pay for treatment for their daughter bethany who has tumours on her brain, kidneys and liver and suffers from up to fifty epileptic fits a day.[19]

it authorises and pays for treatment of narcolepsy with sodium oxybate by means of individual funding requests on the basis of exceptional circumstances. in may 2016 the high court ordered nhs england to provide funding to treat a teenager with severe narcolepsy. the judge criticised their “thoroughly bad decision” and “absurd” policy discriminating against the girl when hundreds of other nhs patients already receive the drug. the department of health is also paying for the treatment of people whose narcolepsy was caused by the swine flu vaccine pandemrix in 2009-10 by means of private prescriptions outside the national health service.[20]

arbitration[edit]
the organisation's responsibilities include arbitration in disputes between clinical commissioning groups and nhs trusts.[21]
clinical commissioning groups (ccgs) are nhs organisations set up by the health and social care act 2012 to organise the delivery of nhs services in england.[1] 211 groups were established in 2013 and there was resistance to any proposals for mergers between groups although gateshead ccg, newcastle north & east ccg and newcastle west ccg merged in 1 april 2015. during 2016 it appeared that further mergers would be permitted and an official procedure was published in november 2016 by nhs england.[2] during 2017 further proposals for merger appeared. 83 ccgs were sharing chief officers in march 2017, which may be a precursor to merger. if all those led to merger there would be 174 groups.[3]

to a certain extent they replace primary care trusts (pcts), though some of the staff and responsibilities moved to local authority public health teams when pcts ceased to exist in april 2013. services directly provided by pcts were reorganised through the transforming community services programme.
ccgs are clinically led groups that include all of the gp groups in their geographical area. the aim of this is to give gps and other clinicians the power to influence commissioning decisions for their patients.[1][4]

ccgs are overseen by nhs england (including its regional offices and area teams). these structures manage primary care commissioning, including holding the nhs contracts for gp practices nhs.[5]

each ccg has a constitution and is run by its governing body. each has to have an accountable officer responsible for the ccg’s duties, functions, finance and governance. most ccgs initially appointed former pct managers to these posts.[6] only a quarter of accountable officers were gps in october 2014, but 80% of ccg chairs were gps.[7] only half of gp practices said they felt involved in ccg decision making processes.[8] the health and social care act 2012 provides that the areas specified in the constitutions of clinical commissioning groups together cover the whole of england, and do not coincide or overlap. each ccg is responsible for persons who are provided with primary medical services by a member of the group, and persons who usually reside in the group’s area and are not provided with primary medical services by a member of any clinical commissioning group.

e-reward, an online pay research service, analysed the pay of more than 2,500 managers at the 211 ccgs in england in 2015. they reported that 56% of 225 top executives – chief officers and chief finance officers – were paying themselves more than the salary range recommended by nhs england of £95,000 to £125,000 a year.[9]

unite the union surveyed the 3,392 ccg board members in 2015 and reported that 513 were directors of private healthcare companies: 140 owned such businesses and 105 carried out external work for them. more than 400 ccg board members were shareholders in such companies.[10] the kings fund and the nuffield trust ran a survey of gps in six areas of england in 2016 and found that more than 70% were at least “somewhat” engaged with the work of their ccg, though only 20% of those without a formal role in their ccg said they could influence the work of their ccg if they chose to.[11]

lakeside healthcare applied to move from corby ccg (where it had 2/3 of the registered population) to nene ccg in 2015, but nene refused to accept it.[12]

during 2017 mergers between ccgs began, having previously been forbidden.[13] gps in staffordshire submitted a vote of no confidence in their local ccgs in protest against a proposed merger. the merger between liverpool, south sefton and southport and formby ccgs was stopped while and investigation into liverpool ccg's governance and management of conflicts of interest was carried out, leading to the resignation of several of its leaders. there were also similar investigations in hackney and crawley.[14]

in october 2017, it was announced that brighton and hove clinical commissioning group was to merge with brighton and hove city council, to form a health and social care integration board: the merge, commencing in april 2018 and culminating in a full merger a year later, is intended to prevent the duplication of work and streamline provision of health and social care within the city.
a national health service trust is an organisation within the english nhs generally serving either a geographical area or a specialised function (such as an ambulance service). in any particular location there may be several trusts involved in the different aspects of healthcare for a resident.
nhs trusts were established under the national health service and community care act 1990 and were set up in five waves. each one was established by a statutory instrument.

the trusts are not trusts in the legal sense but are in effect public sector corporations. each trust is headed by a board consisting of executive and non-executive directors, and is chaired by a non-executive director. there were about 2,200 non-executives across 470 organisations in the nhs in england in 2015.[1] non-executive directors are recruited by open advertisement. all trusts (foundation trusts and those which have yet to reach foundation trust status) are regulated by nhs improvement. board members are, from november 2014, subject to a fit and proper person test.

all trust boards are required to have an audit committee consisting only of non-executive directors, on which the chair may not sit. this committee is entrusted not only with supervision of financial audit, but of systems of corporate governance within the trust. hospital board members have a duty to act on signals of poor performance on quality and safety data, and yet many of the papers presented to them have been found to be lacking good data visualisations.[2]

future development[edit]
in september 2015 jeremy hunt was reported as saying “i think we do have too many trusts as independent organisations in a context where mergers between trusts and the establishment of chains of hospitals were being discussed.[3] subsequently simon stevens made it clear that he did not expect the remaining nhs trusts to become foundation trusts, saying we are frankly kidding ourselves if we think the non-fts are going to pass the kinds of criteria that have been set by monitor.[4]

the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.


the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.

shifting the balance of power
contents next page previous page
background
2.21 the nhs plan sets out a vision for service designed around the patient - a service of high quality and national standards which is fast, convenient and uses modern methods to provide care where and when it is needed. such a service will not only be designed around patients but also be responsive to them, offer them choices and involve them in decision making and planning.

the secretary of state announced on 25 april 2001 a programme to shift the balance of power within the nhs away from central government and towards front line staff and their patients. under the arrangements set out in secretary of state's shifting the balance of power speech local clinicians and managers, working in primary care trusts and nhs trusts, were to be empowered to ensure that local services reflect the needs of the local community. 'shifting the balance of power' is about putting patients and staff absolutely at the heart of the nhs by empowering them and changing the culture and structure of the nhs to reflect this.

preparing for change
in july 2001 the department published shifting the balance of power within the nhs - securing delivery, (2.29) detailing the proposed changes and inviting responses in a discussion period. over 400 responses were received from the service as well as the major national representative bodies. there was general support for the direction of change, although there were many queries about the detailed implementation of the proposals. shifting the balance of power - the next steps(2.30) was published in january 2002. this document addressed the major issues raised in the discussion period. it set out the framework and principles for the changes but - inline with its own philosophy - left the practical arrangements, the how, when and where of working arrangements and service delivery - to be decided locally. consultation on the boundaries of the new health authorities took place in autumn 2001 and the new boundaries were subsequently confirmed along with the chairs and chief executives (designate). franchise plans were then developed by the chief executives outlining how they intended to run their organisations, based on a specification set by the department.

structural changes
much progress has been made in developing and implementing the structural changes:

england's 95 previous health authorities were abolished on 1 april 2002.
much of the planning and commissioning work previously carried out by these health authorities has been passed to just over 300 primary care trusts, which by 2004 will be controlling over 75 per cent of nhs funding.
28 new health authorities (set to become strategic health authorities in october 2002, subject to legislation) serving populations of around 1.5 million were also established on 1 april, responsible for developing strategy and performance managing pcts and nhs trusts, so as to secure delivery and consistency of approach. they will in effect manage the nhs locally on behalf of the department.
the department of health has also been re-focusing to reflect the new structure. four new directorates of health and social care became operational on 1 april with responsibility for working directly with the nhs and performance managing the new health authorities while the regional offices are to be abolished.
as a result of these changes, £100 million will be freed up by 2004 to spend on childcare facilities for nhs staff as an aid to recruitment and retention.

delivering the nhs plan
plans for devolving power to locally run services - within a framework of clear national standards - were strengthened in the department's delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform (2.31) document, published in april 2002. this document builds on the structural and cultural changes of shifting the balance of power.

further information
further information is available on the dh web-site at:

department of health 'shifting the balance of power: securing delivery'
department of health 'shifting the balance of power: the next steps'
department of health 'delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform.

planet health cymru launched at walking and cycling conference
thursday, 4 november 2010
planet health cymru, a new web resource for all those working in the built and natural environment and health, was launched at the third annual walking and cycling conference.
 
the resource encourages collaborative working and provides information and signposting to the planning sector; allowing them to incorporate health considerations in their decision making on future developments.
 
it was developed by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales, managed by public health wales.
 
planet health cymru (planning for environment, transport and health) www.planethealthcymru.org seeks to provide a ‘one-stop-shop’ for people working in health, the green and urban environments, design and architecture, regeneration, sustainability, transport and community development amongst others.
 
the welsh assembly government aims to encourage physical activity and give due prominence to walking and cycling through development and infrastructure planning and decision making. the new website is one means of supporting this aim, set out in planning policy wales and creating an active wales.
 
the work has been led by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales working with a wide-ranging advisory board which includes representatives from the welsh assembly government, royal town planners institute, welsh local government association, design commission wales, institute of civil engineers, centre for regeneration excellence in wales, the transport consortia and countryside council for wales.
 
su mably, consultant in public health for public health wales who oversaw the development of the project commented, “we have the opportunity to learn from the lessons of the past, for example the tower blocks built in the 1950s and 1960s, when not much consideration was given to how these homes would impact on residents’ mental, social and physical health.
 
“planet health cymru is an excellent tool which will allow all those working in planning, regeneration, transport, design and health to consider the health of the local people when developing new projects.”
 
the minister for environment, sustainability and housing, jane davidson said: “today’s walking and cycling conference is all about encouraging people in wales to make healthy and sustainable travel choices.
 
“if we are to succeed in this ambition we must make walking and cycling as safe and easy as possible. the planning of our villages, towns and cities is key to this and i am delighted that the planet cymru web resource will help to ensure that health considerations are fully factored into the planning process.”
 
dr tony jewell, chief medical officer for wales, added: “it is important to give people information to enable them to make informed choices in an effort to improve their health and well-being. it is crucial to make health choices, easy choices. how we plan and build our towns and cities is key to making easier choices – making it easier for people to walk or cycle to the shops or to school, rather than use the car, or to have local spaces to walk or relax.

public health wales is the national public health agency in wales and exists to protect and improve health and wellbeing and reduce health inequalities for people in wales. we are part of the nhs and report to the cabinet secretary for health, well-being and sport in the welsh government.

with a strong board, 1,700 staff and a budget of £106 million, the organisation employs the majority of the specialist public health resource in wales. 

we provide advice, expertise and specialist services to welsh government (working across departments), the seven health boards, two nhs trusts, 22 local authorities, other agencies and to the population of wales.
 
we provide the public health knowledge, scientific expertise and intelligence to lead transformational change and to drive a focus on ensuring that we deliver tangible improvements in health and wellbeing outcomes and reduce health inequalities in wales. 

health and local government are among the devolved areas in wales and therefore, working nationally and locally, public health wales has access to both policy levers and local delivery systems by working closely with our partners. 

each of the seven health boards in wales employs a director of public health who is supported by the critical mass of expertise employed by public health wales at the local and community level and who, under an honorary contract, manages locally based public health wales staff. 

public health wales, health boards and local authorities work closely together to promote public health in their areas and jointly identify and set the local strategic agenda in partnership with communities, housing, education, police, fire and rescue and the voluntary sector. 
 
 
 cartrefu, which means to reside in welsh, is a four year programme run by gwanwyn which aims to improve access to quality arts experiences for older people in residential care.

between 2015 and 2017 age cymru recruited 16 professional artists in four different fields: performing arts, visual arts, words and music. these artists each delivered eight 8-week residencies across the length and breadth of wales, introducing a mix of established art forms and new activities residents may not have had the chance to experience before.

cartrefu has been a huge success and over the past two years our artists have delivered over 1,000 art workshops in care homes around wales. age cymru was able to offer these workshops entirely for free due to the generous support from the arts council of wales and the baring foundation.

in 2017 cartrefu re-launched with a brand new team of 12 artists, this time working in care homes for 12 weeks. with our second team of cartrefu artists we want to push the boundaries of what has been attempted in care homes before, and hope to inspire bold and striking new art work from the residents our artists work with.

we hope that cartrefu will foster a greater appreciation of the arts among care home staff as they work with our artists. we want care home staff to gain more confidence and acquire new skills, sharing and practicing them in their daily work with residents.

cartrefu has designed an activity pack for care homes, based on the work our first cartrefu team of artists developed in care homes. the activity pack feature 20 simple but effective activities for care home staff to run with residents and are free to all care homes in wales.

to obtain your free pack, please get in touch with cartrefu project coordinator reg noyes

evaluation report
we recently launched our evalution report in the senedd on tuesday 10 october 2017. 

the evaluation, undertaken by dr katherine algar skaife from the dementia research centre wales at bangor university, found that cartrefu increased the well-being of residents, improved their social skills, and even helped some of them regain long lost abilities like using a knife and fork. it also found that the project had a positive impact on the care home staff with many reporting improved attitudes to residents, especially those with dementia. one carer said “it made me realise residents are more capable than one might give them credit for.”

the evaluation also found that the project developed a group of artists who are now better equipped to work with vulnerable older people in care settings and that the lives of the residents are more like to be reflected in future work undertaken by the artists. you can download a copy of the evaluation report below.

if you'd like more information about our cartrefu project, please contact us or visit the gwanwyn website.

 


funding of clinical commissioning groups[edit]
nhs england allocates funding (of £69.5 billion in 2016/7) to ccgs in accordance with a funding formula. until 2016 progress towards the amount indicated by the formula from the historical allocation was very slow, and ccgs which were above their allocation did not actually suffer a reduction. from april 2016 however ccgs with more than 10% above their fair share will receive flat cash - an effective reduction. this will also ensure than no ccg is more than 5% below its target allocation in 2016/7
an nhs england spokesman said: the recent cold snap has seen hospitals put under pressure, but they are generally coping. additional services and beds will be coming online over the next few weeks funded by the [£337m] winter budget cash released by the government. staff are working hard to ensure ambulance handovers are as smooth as possible.”
taken together, the four national health services in 2015-16 employed around 1.6 million people with a combined budget of £136.7 billion.[5] in 2014 the total health sector workforce across the uk was 2,165,043. this broke down into 1,789,586 in england, 198,368 in scotland, 110,292 in wales and 66,797 in northern ireland.


towards a healthier wales
a commitment to build a healthier nation will be at the top of a plaid cymru government’s priorities. it is a massive challenge, and there are no quick fixes or miracle cures.wales has a legacy of chronic ill-health, especially in some of our poorest communities. it is a sad fact that our country suffers from some of the highest incidences of cardiac disease, respiratory problems and cancers in the western world.

as well as securing better provision and prompter availability of health services, the building of a healthier society involves longerterm measures aimed at improving the general health and well-being of all our people. health means much more than the absence of disease; it implies a sense of well-being, vigour and fulfilment.this is influenced by a range of factors in which the delivery of health services is only part – albeit a vital one.

the creation of a healthy nation is a project which must involve all our people, all our services, and all government departments. it calls for waging war on poverty, strengthening our economy, building a fairer society and safer communities, good houses and a pleasant environment, and a rich cultural life for this reason every department in a plaid cymru government will need to show how its work and decisions contribute to this task.

action is required on at least three fronts:

tackling the poverty that causes so much ill health;
increasing the capacity of our health services to deliver speedy and effective treatment to the sick and needy;
the promotion of healthy lifestyles.
(a) poverty and ill-health
there is now indisputable evidence of the link between poverty and ill health. not only are the poorest the sickest members of our society, but illness of itself is also a key generator of poverty. clear evidence of this link was provided by the black report in 1980, but the conservative government of the time chose to ignore its findings and the problems grew worse. more recent research has highlighted the link and the deep seated nature of the problems caused by poverty. a plaid cymru government will ensure that a full understanding of this destructive synergy between poverty and sickness will be mainstreamed into all government policy and decision making. further research has shown that the extent of inequality in societies also has a direct effect on levels of sickness.therefore the creation of a fairer society must be a fundamental part of the drive towards a healthier wales.we will ensure that our economic policies will be geared to achieving greater equality, and thus reinforce our efforts to tackle all the determinants of sickness in wales.

(b) health and social services
in the short to medium term, our quest for a healthier wales will depend heavily on improving our health and social services. this is our front line of attack upon illness and disease. these services should be guided by the principles of equality, respect and dignity for all people. organisations exist to provide for people, and it is their responsibility always to strive to enable and promote well-being, responding always to individuals’ interests and choices.

discrimination in the provision of services is unacceptable, and we will take proactive steps to promote equal treatment; ensuring for example that same-sex partners are regarded as next of kin when medical decisions are being made.

responsibility for health is one of the national assembly’s main functions.the nhs accounts for around 35% of the assembly’s budget, which means that £4,158,448 will be spent in 2003-4.the nhs is also wales’ biggest employer, with a total of 87,000 full and part-time staff members, accounting for 7% of the total welsh workforce.

we all admire the dedication of its doctors, nurses, social workers, other health professionals, and the ancillary staff, who perform daily miracles in very difficult circumstances. both they and their clients have been badly let down by governments over the years. our health service today is suffering the effects of 20 years and more of neglect and under-funding under both the conservatives and new labour. in wales, despite having the worst incidence of sickness, we have the least capacity to treat it of any part of the uk. the barnett formula for calculating the national assembly’s block grant takes no account of our ageing population. neither does it take account of the increase in deprivation levels and therefore illness caused by industrial collapse in many communities. the result is that it is well-nigh impossible for expenditure for improved provision to keep up with levels in england, except at the expense of other policy areas, such as housing, transport or economic development, themselves crucial for improving health and well-being. the effect of this is illustrated by the fact that at the beginning of 2003 no-one was waiting over 18 months for an operation in england while the figure for wales was 5,391. this despite the fact that wales has only 5% of the uk population! on top of this, our health service is still suffering from the misguided policies of past conservative governments, whose introduction of the internal market into the nhs has been so damaging.a further blow to health services in wales occurred in 1993, when john redwood in effect abolished strategic national planning. today, patients in wales are paying a heavy price for the decision of tony blair’s government to keep to tory spending plans for its first four years. while we certainly welcome the extra investment that is at long last on its way to the health service,we regard it as still inadequate, and deplore the fact that it has come at least four years too late. lack of spending in health is disproportionate in that the effects of underspending in one year affect succeeding years. for each pound not spent in the late 1990s, much more must be spent now.

in 1999, labour promised that no-one in wales would have to wait more than six months for an out-patient appointment.the figure in february stood at 76,400, as compared to 676 in england. labour must bear full responsibility for failing to deliver on its promises. disguising the truth through spin and double-counting must no longer be allowed to deceive us. the reality is growing waiting times, deficient infrastructure, treatment failures, shortage of medical personnel including nurses, gps and consultants, and a committed workforce demoralised by sheer pressure of work.

in 2003 we face a further threat to the health service with the sixth restructuring in 13 years.we have opposed these so-called ‘reforms’ because they divert resources and attention from the real issue of increasing capacity, and because we do not believe that the new structures will be fit for purpose. the logic behind scrapping the five health authorities and imposing 22 new local health boards (lhbs) is far from apparent, and has been met with a deep-seated anxiety and scepticism among health professionals.as well as the lhbs, various other organisations are to be established, bringing the total number of bodies responsible for health care in wales to 52. there is grave concern about the capacity of many of the lhbs to carry out their duties efficiently and effectively, and their sheer number will reduce the possibility of strategic planning.with the trusts being retained, a key element of the conservatives’ internal market remains in place, despite labour’s claims that one of the purposes of the reorganisation was to tackle it. the costs of setting up and running such an elaborate structure will add up to many millions of pounds, whatever misleading claims are made by the assembly’s health minister.

a plaid cymru government will therefore inherit an under-funded health service newly thrown into the turbulence of an inappropriate reorganisation.

more doctors, nurses, and beds
the immediate priority will be to develop greater capacity in terms of more doctors, nurses, other health professionals, and beds. a plaid cymru government will put in place a detailed and coherent strategy towards this end; and we will co-operate with health professionals to find the best and most efficient ways of delivering these services. on taking office we will begin an immediate audit of the present capacity of the nhs in wales, including the key interfaces with social services, by amending the remit given to derrick wanless in october 2002. once this is complete, in consultation with representatives of the medical and care professions, we will draw up a national capacity plan.this plan will provide an all-wales strategy with short, medium and long term goals for:

more doctors, nurses, dentists, physiotherapists and other health professionals;
the provision of more beds and appropriate equipment in hospitals;
the provision of adequate and suitable nursing and residential care for the elderly;
a campaign aimed at the retention of qualified staff.
hospitals loom large in public consciousness. consequently, in any debate on the nhs, a fact often overlooked is that 90 per cent of health care contact remains at the primary level. recognising the crucial importance of primary care, we will place particular emphasis on gp recruitment as part of our national capacity plan. given the alarming statistics about a looming crisis in the number of gps, and reports of waiting lists for a month or more for a doctor’s appointment, urgent action is clearly needed. in addition to implementing the new gps contract, we will offer an attractive package to encourage gps, including the option of salaried gps, to serve in underprivileged areas where there are severe health needs.

we will be seeking ways of stripping away bureaucratic burdens on staff. doctors, nurses, and other health and social services professionals must be able to concentrate their time on caring for patients, rather than being tied down with unnecessary paperwork. in consultation with representatives of the nursing and medical professions we will also be seeking imaginative and effective ways of skill-mixing. this will not only free up time for doctors to concentrate on making full use of their professional skills, but also enhance the potential of trained nursing staff.

as well as being primary-led, plaid cymru has always insisted that health provision must be community-based in all its aspects.we wish to encourage, where appropriate, a fuller integration of health centres and community hospitals.we will also take steps to ensure that the care and support provided by social services is accessible in health centres and surgeries.this will be part of a drive to develop a closer working partnership between health and social services, and local authorities have a clear role to play in this.

the voluntary sector has a vital role, for example through the hospice movement.we will work closely with the sector to ensure that funding is predictable and stable.

recognising the disruption caused to the nhs by the constant reorganisation of recent years, a plaid cymru government will do everything possible to avoid further restructuring. despite our misgivings, we will do everything possible to make the new system work as well as possible. however, we will be keeping a careful eye on the situation, working closely with professional and patient bodies.we will encourage collaboration among the lhbs, and the objective in the longer term will to integrate their work with the nhs trusts, maintaining the principle of coterminosity, and thus move away from the remaining elements of the internal market.

certain functions are best fulfilled at the national level, including strategic planning and a strategy aimed at generating significant savings through the rationalisation of prescriptions.

(c) older people
it is fundamental and crucial that the enormous contribution made by older people to our society be fully recognised. their accumulated wisdom and experience constitute an invaluable asset which can be of particular benefit to children and young people.we will work with relevant organisations to find ways of maximising this contribution. the stereotyping of the elderly as dependent and infirm is unacceptable as well as inaccurate. however, advancing years bring with them particular needs in relation to care, and it is an indicator of a civilised society that these are properly catered for, if only as a way of acknowledging a lifetime’s commitment to the welfare of others.

we regard the artificial distinction between nursing and personal care needs as particularly damaging. it can inhibit the provision of early medical intervention to prevent ill-health and possible hospitalisation. quite apart from the sheer injustice of such a situation, it imposes unnecessary pressure on the capacity of the health service to treat patients. that is why we deplore the uk government’s refusal to implement the key recommendation of its own royal commission on the long-term care of the elderly: to abolish the distinction between nursing and personal care.the national assembly, unlike the scottish parliament, currently lacks the powers to implement the royal commission’s recommendations, while the injustice of the barnett formula would make it extremely difficult to meet the cost. a party of wales government will press for both these deficiencies to be corrected so that older people in wales can be treated with justice and dignity in the meanwhile much can be achieved in other ways.

we will combat ageism in all its forms, for example by ensuring that assessment for services is made according to need not age, and by developing advocacy and consultation with service users and carers. in this we will work with community health councils and care forum wales.

in order to address the burden on carers, we will be looking at ways of adequately resourcing the national carers’ strategy. older people with needs should have support to enable them to make their own choices about the settings that they regard as most appropriate, and services should be geared to this objective.

we will emphasise the need for early identification of needs and prompt intervention.this will help to reduce admissions to residential and nursing homes and hospitals, and the need for older people to uprooted as their needs change.to this end we will look to the development of integrated multi-disciplinary long-term care teams to provide for older people’s acute, rehabilitation, and assessment needs. an immediate issue is the crisis in the carehome sector which threatens to damage providers and clients alike, as well as exacerbating problems in our hospitals. it is of particular concern that family-run homes which provide the kind of homely environment so valued by clients face particular difficulties.this will need to be included in the wanless review.

older people have the right to maintain as much independence as possible, and the provision of services should be geared to this aim.we will provide las with the resources to pay for free home social care such as home-helps.

(d) others with long-term care needs
people of all ages can have long-term care needs.these should be met according to the same principles as those set out above.

(e) mental health
we will not tolerate any stigmatisation of those who suffer from mental illness.they are among the most vulnerable members of society, and must be given high-quality health care and treatment. we will continue to oppose the proposed mental health act, particularly as its reactionary proposals for the detention and enforced treatment of the mentally ill offend against basic human rights. it lacks any sound scientific basis and will be costly to implement, as the resources do not currently exist.

we support the promotion and expansion of community mental health teams. however, we need to beware of any resultant rationalisation and reduction in beds, causing the centralisation of services. indeed there is an urgent need for additional beds.

(f) children’s services
our proposal to establish a department of education and children’s and young people’s services will strengthen coordination in serving children.we will:

emphasise the need to work with children and families to prevent abuse from occurring;
ensure effective and swift child protection systems.
working in partnership with las, we will give the highest priority to child protection and seek to ensure that no part of the system fails our most vulnerable children.we will work with the children’s commissioner and voluntary and community organisations to take forward the principles outlined in the children’s manifesto.

(g) disability
an area which has seen enormous progress over recent years is in attitudes to and provision for, disabled people. however, discrimination is still common, and the capacity of disabled people to fulfil their potential and contribute to society is still frustrated in too many ways.we recognise that disability issues are fundamentally about equality,which is why the recommendations below go well beyond the scope of health and social care.

a party of wales government will operate on the basis of the “social model” which recognises that it is society that disables the individual. recognising this reality is crucial to implementing equal opportunities.

2003 is the european year of the disabled and we will mark this with a fresh commitment to remove obstacles to real equality.we will work with disability organisations to make improvements in key areas such as:

support and confidence-building programmes and advocacy and advisory services;
equal access to health services and community and leisure activities;
educational opportunities to enhance quality of life;
countering discrimination in employment;
empowerment of service users through promoting direct payments.
we will recognise british sign language (bsl) as a language in its own right and promote its use.

(h) recruitment and retention in social services
as with the nhs, difficulties with recruitment and retention of social services staff inhibit the capacity to provide consistent services of high quality.whereas pay levels contribute to this, morale is also undermined by the burden of bureaucracy and the targetsetting culture, which diverts time and resources from the essential task of serving clients’ needs, and also distorts priorities.

a plaid cymru government will:

emphasise and disseminate good practice;
work with the wales care council and the regional care partnerships on workforce planning and recruitment;
emphasise the right of workers to benefit from training and career development opportunities;
seek to improve job-security and conditions of work;
encourage flexible work opportunities so as to promote equal opportunities, reduce strain, make best use of available skills, and respond better to the needs of users.
(i) the promotion of healthy living
as well as being better than cure, prevention saves money in the long run. a plaid cymru government will seek the necessary powers to introduce free eye tests and free dental checks for all.the additional expenditure will be more than justified in both human and financial terms through the early detection of disease which would result.

we will develop an effective programme of health promotion. present initiatives to reduce smoking and encourage the eating of fresh fruit and vegetables, though laudable enough, are too narrowly focused on the individual. as a result they have had little impact where most needed. our programme for health promotion will be evidence-based and focused on communities.

we will learn lessons from other european countries and regions where community based initiatives have been successful in tackling entrenched problems of ill-health.

our programme will in particular build on the communities first programme.there will be a focus on achieving recognisable health gain in the hundred most deprived wards which will be designated as community health action zones. healthy living will be promoted through our early years educare programme we will act upon the national assembly’s resolution to seek primary legislation specific to wales to ban smoking in certain public buildings.

we will also issue guidelines to schools to discourage the selling of sugar-saturated drinks and fat-saturated foods to our children, and ensure that school meals are healthy, nutritious and attractive. learning from the lessons of the powys food initiative we will also work with local uthorities to develop procurement policies so as to favour local sourcing of good quality produce.

we will build upon and extend current initiatives for free access to swimming pools and leisure centres, particularly for children and young people and in disadvantaged communities.

a plaid cymru government will:

ensure that all government departments work towards a healthier wales by tackling the poverty that causes ill health;
produce a national capacity plan to employ and retain more doctors, nurses and beds;
press for adequate funding to meet wales’s greater needs;
seek alternatives to pfi and all other schemes aimed at ‘privatisation by stealth’;
reduce bureaucracy and the proliferation of structures that set up boundaries between agencies, particularly health, social services and the voluntary sector;
fund the provision of free home social care.
we will seek primary legislation to:

• enable the implementation of the recommendations of the royal commission on long term care for the elderly;
• to provide free eye tests and dental checks for all;
• to effect a ban on smoking in certain public buildings in wales.


glebelands care home in wokingham is one of the most impressive homes for older people in the county of berkshire. the care home provides highest quality residential care and nursing care in a beautiful setting. 

a stunning grade ii listed building set within its own beautiful and expansive grounds the home not only delivers exceptional residential and nursing care to its residents it also provides an exceptional quality of life and sense of well-being.

the location of the home exceeds all expectations, with rolling neatly trimmed meadows surrounded by wildlife filled woodlands the residents often wake up to bird song and views of roaming deer. 

despite this rural feel and sense of living deep within the countryside it is just a short walk from the heart of the charming market town of wokingham; ensuring many of the residents are frequent visitors to the tea shops and cafes which they enjoy with their loved ones or fellow residents and staff from the home.

glebelands care home in wokingham does not deliver care and support to those living with dementia instead focussing on providing exceptional residential and nursing care. the glebelands is well respected by local healthcare professionals, enjoying an excellent reputation and has a highly coveted “good” rating from the care quality commission; the home also enjoys a high degree of satisfaction from its residents and their loved ones.

the lifestyle of our residents is a key focus, which is why they only offer a full time activity programme but also a range of well–being activities such as hand and foot massages and aromatherapy. these have proved just as popular over the years with residents enjoying trips out, quizzes, wildlife interactions or film nights.

if you think that you or a loved one may soon need care pop in for a chat and find out what the greensleeves difference really is.
hospice care

the aim of hospice care is to improve the lives of people who have an incurable illness.

hospices provide care for people from the point at which their illness is diagnosed as terminal, to the end of their life, however long that may be. that doesn't mean hospice care needs to be continuous. people sometimes like to take a break from hospice care if their condition has become stable and they are feeling well.

hospice care places a high value on dignity, respect, and the wishes of the person who is ill, and aims to look after all their needs.

hospice care provides for medical, emotional, social, practical, psychological, and spiritual needs, plus the needs of the person’s family and carers. looking after all these aspects is often referred to as holistic care.

care also extends to those people who are close to the patient, and into the bereavement period after the patient has died.

where is hospice care provided?
most hospice care is provided in your own home, but it can also be provided in a care home, as an in-patient at the hospice itself, or as a day patient visiting the hospice. hospice care is a style of care, rather than something that takes place in a specific building. 

hospice teams include doctors, nurses, social workers, therapists, counsellors, and trained volunteers.  

hospices aim to feel more like a home than hospitals do. they can provide individual care more suited to the person who is approaching the end of life, in a gentler and calmer atmosphere than a hospital.

what does hospice care cover?
hospices vary, but your local hospice will offer medical and nursing care, including controlling pain and other symptoms. it may also offer: 

physiotherapy
occupational therapy
complementary therapies, such as massage 
rehabilitation (helping you build up your health and strength, such as through exercise)
respite care (giving your carers a break from caring for a while)
information about financial and other practical issues
bereavement care
spiritual and psychological help
most hospices will be happy to talk to you about what they can offer or show you around their facilities if you are considering hospice care. the staff can discuss any issues with you and answer questions.

when does hospice care start?
some people think that you only have hospice care when you are dying, but this is not true. a hospice palliative care team might help control symptoms such as pain or breathlessness early on in your illness, with you staying at the hospice for a few days before going home again.

or you might go into the hospice so that your family or carers can have a break from looking after you for a short while. this is called respite care.

some people have a number of periods of hospice care, depending on their condition and their wishes.

hospice care is free of charge. you can contact a hospice directly yourself, but the team will usually also ask for a referral from your doctor or nurse. hospice places are limited, but you can contact your local hospice to see what is available.

hospices are funded through a combination of nhs funding and public donations.

for an example of what hospice care is like, see life at the hospice of st francis.

how can i find a local hospice?
to find a local hospice:

you or your carer can ask your gp or district nurse
you can use the end of life care and hospices services search
you can contact hospice uk
you can use the find me help service on the dying matters website  
healthtalk.org has videos and written interviews of people talking about their experiences of hospice in-patient care and hospice day care.

read more about what you can expect from end of life care.

patients suffering from cancer are being offered the chance of a visit to a seaside retreat following the opening of a unique purpose-built hotel in bournemouth.

the grove offers patients and others with life-threatening illnesses the chance for respite and relaxation in an environment specially designed to combine the homely surroundings of a hotel with access to vital clinical care.

with nursing staff on hand, visitors and their families and carers can enjoy a week or two on the coast staying in modern accommodation just 100 yards from the clifftop and with access to a private beach hut, miles of golden sand and fleet of mobility scooters.

speaking to bbh , hotel manager, brenden howard, said: “several years ago the macmillan trust in christchurch sent some cancer patients to swanage for a holiday and it did them a lot of good. that sparked the idea for a purpose-built facility and the grove opened last year.


“we designed the facility to look like a hotel and not a hospital, with modern furniture and light, bright décor. all the bedrooms look out onto the local scenery, with garden views from the side rooms. there are also stunning grounds which people can walk around.

“one of the 30 en-suite bedrooms is fully accessible to the disabled and has an electric bed, reclining chair and a body dryer. two further bedrooms also have bathrooms that are dda compliant and suitable for wheelchair access, and all rooms have a pull chord in the bathroom and an emergency chord by the bed and residents can request additional aids such as boosted toilet seats. but, apart from these small additions, the rooms are otherwise similar to those you would find in any modern hotel.”

but, unlike most hotels, the availability of nursing advice and support means patients who would not otherwise be able to go on holiday can get the relaxation they need to aid their recovery.

howard said: “often when people are suffering from a terminal illness or in recovery they cannot go on holiday because they cannot get the support they may need and feel vulnerable and anxious in case something should happen. while providing a hotel-style environment, the grove has this vital clinical support, with nurses offering advice and help should patients need it. this is difficult to get in traditional holiday resorts.”

patients and their carers also get the chance to talk to others staying at the hotel, providing another important support network.

“people come for a week or two and they all love it,” said howard. “this is a unique facility and we want to help as many people as possible.”

the service is supported by macmillan caring locally, with rates for patients starting at £301 a week for a standard room and £350 a week for a superior room.

hospitals have been ordered to cancel non-urgent surgery amid fears that surging flu levels will see them deluged with patients over christmas and the new year.

the instructions from health officials came as new figures showed a near doubling in the number of patients facing long waits in ambulances.

two thirds of nhs trusts have now declared occupancy levels of at least 95 per cent - far above the recommended 85 per cent limit, amid rising cases of flu and norovirus.

gps have now been ordered to start prescribing antiviral drugs to care home residents and vulnerable hospital patients to prevent spread of the disease, as well as to treat flu in pensioners and those with health conditions.

–– advertisement ––




the latest nhs figures show almost 10,000 patients waiting in ambulances for at least one hour in the last month, with an 86 per cent rise in delays in the last fortnight.

in the last week, accident & emergency (a&e) turned patients away on 30 occasions, a rise from 25 such incidents the previous week.

officials yesterday issued orders to trusts to clear more space to deal with an expected surge in pressures, over the christmas period. hospitals have been told to stop carrying out non-urgent surgery and  to convert outpatient clinics into makeshift wards.

new figures show flu levels are rising, with the start of the season expected to be declared next week, while norovirus levels continue to increase, with a 14 per cent jump in the last week.

hospitals are already recording high levels of flu, with 23 confirmed cases in intensive care units, and eight flu-related deaths so far this season.

officials fear hospitals are too full to cope if patterns seen in australia - which had the worst flu season in two decades - are replicated here.

the decisions were taken by a meeting of the new nhs national emergency pressures panel, set up this year to monitor levels of strain on the service.

sir bruce keogh, nhs medical director said: “nhs staff are working flat out to cope with seasonal pressures and ensure patients receive the best possible care.

 

 


“however, given the scale of the challenge, hospitals should be planning for the surge that comes in the new year by freeing up beds and staff where they can to care for our sickest patients.”

trusts have been told to defer non-urgent operations until mid-january.

dr nick scriven, president of the society for acute medicine, said he believed cancellations could last up to six weeks longer. 

he said the decision to stop surgery was the right one, but said it was worrying that the measures were being taken without much actual unexpected stress on the system. 

“we have not yet seen anything out of the ordinary weather or infection-wise so my belief is that this stance will need to be extended until at least the end of february, he said. 

professor derek alderson, president of the royal college of surgeons, said: “no-one wants to have their surgery cancelled with less than 24 hours’ notice, yet this was the unacceptable experience for thousands of patients last winter.

“this guidance from nhs england will help to avoid a repeat of that situation and ensure finite hospital capacity is prioritised on patients in most need of help. however, we appreciate that this guidance still arrives at short notice for patients due to have their operation in the coming week.”

cancer operations and time-critical procedures should be prioritised, the advice states.

pauline philip, nhs national director for urgent and emergency care said: “we know that the nhs is about to enter into the most challenging part of the year with spikes in demand likely after the christmas and new year breaks.”

she urged the public to “play their part” by using pharmacies and nhs 111 when possible, and having flu jabs if eligible.

 

a survey has been launched asking the public whether they think the combined organisation should be called: colchester and ipswich nhs foundation trust, or east suffolk and north essex nhs foundation trust.

advertising

the choice is restricted by national nhs guidelines and these are the only two options up for consideration.

this title will only be used for the over-arching trust and both sites remain ipswich hospital and colchester general hospital.

bosses say they will take the views of staff, patients, partners, members of the public and supporters into account before deciding on the new name of the trust in the spring.

the mps for ipswich and colchester have both expressed no preference about the name, as long as the merger works for patients.

sandy martin, who represents ipswich, said: “i think whether it will be good for ipswich depends on what specialisms and services are in ipswich hospital, i don’t think the name enters into it.

“my meeting with the chief executive at ipswich hospital led me to believe that services for ipswich people will probably be better as a result of the merger.

“if it does go ahead, i will obviously be interested in what happens going forward to make sure that’s the case. if that is the case, i see no point in opposing the merger.”

colchester’s will quince shared similar views.

he said: “i’m broadly supportive of the merger, i think it’s working so far. of course we are keeping a watchful brief of it.

“the name of the trust is somewhat irrelevant because we are always going to have ipswich and colchester hospitals.

“the two trusts are right to recognise that they serve a much wider population, so i’m relatively relaxed about the name.”

one of the biggest changes to ipswich hospital highlighted by the survey is the fact it will become a foundation trust.

generally, foundation trusts are still part of the nhs and subject to the same standards, but they are free from central government control.

staff and patients have a greater say in the running of the hospital, and foundation trusts are led by a democratically elected board of governors.

colchester hospital became a foundation trust in 2008.

a detailed business case for the merger is currently being drawn up, with a final decision due to be made in june 2018.

not a day goes by when the nhs is not in the news in one way or another. often the stories are around an nhs under so much pressure, so short of staff or so short of beds that it cannot safely care for patients. that is why the nhs is making the news – because it is about life and death. something we all have a vested interest in.

i qualified in 1997 from sheffield university medical school and new labour had just been elected on a landslide. my patients then had to wait 12-18 months for life-saving heart bypass operations. patients died on the waiting list because they didn’t get their operation on time. by 2010, when new labour lost the election, my patients waited less than 18 weeks and received treatment so they could live a longer and healthier life.

my reason for explaining this is that politics does matter. politics has a huge impact on our day-to-day lives and voting is so important. asking our politicians difficult questions is important too. the news this week from an investigation by labour saying that 100,000 nhs posts lie vacant chimes many bells with my colleagues and i in the nhs.

uk news in pictures
52
show all
day to day we see empty gaps on rotas as there are not enough gps, junior doctors, consultants, nurses, radiographers and physios, along with many other roles, to do the work to look after patients. the knock-on effect of this is that waiting times increase and patients get frustrated at long queues in hospital clinics or surgeries.

staff are under such huge pressure, working flat out, that they become more and more demoralised and upset that they can’t properly do the job they were trained to do. some staff just can’t continue and throw the towel in – leaving the nhs many years earlier than they would have done if it had been properly looked after. their long experience is lost to the nhs and ultimately lost to the patients they would have looked after.

the spin and misinformation from the government is spewed forth on a daily basis and i don’t know any nhs worker who believes the likes of jeremy hunt or theresa may when they say “there are more doctors and nurses than ever before in the nhs” – the facts just do not back this up and show the usage of spin by government. in my own specialty of general practice, we are worryingly short of gps, with many surgeries one or two gps down, leaving those working to cover even more patients with subsequent stress levels rising considerably.

nhs england boss demands £350m-a-week promised by leave voters
we are woefully short of hospital beds, leaving patients stuck in a hospital car parks in the back of an ambulance. gp colleagues are having to wait longer and longer for ambulances for seriously ill patients in their surgeries as shown by recent social media messages from gps, which include the following:

“90-minute wait for ambulance for 36-week-old with sepsis. just don’t have the words”.

“we nearly ran out yesterday after a 3-hour wait. and had an asthmatic child who waited 6 hours. used all our oxygen when the ambo miraculously arrived”.

he flew his drone into strange hole in lake, but when he sees the footage
travelwhip
it was the most iconic line of all time, but he was never meant to say it at all
smartied
blind dog's reaction to surgery broke the internet
scribol
  by taboola sponsored links 
we also now see the emergence of a new role in hospitals – that of the “corridor nurse”. due to the ridiculous lack of beds (due to funding cuts) nurses now care for patients in corridors so that ambulances can leave for the next emergency. many members of the public are unaware of this because the government is keen to keep quiet about such gross failures on its part.

in 2018 let us hope the nhs receives the funding it deserves so that staff numbers can be increased to look after patients safely and in a timely fashion. it is incumbent on us all to challenge our mps on the true facts over the nhs and i urge you to do so via this very simple online system.

slashing queues, helping new mothers: nhs explores apps for care in a digital age
doctors, tech experts and scientists tested new ideas at a health ‘hackathon’ – now a fund aims to back the best with cash
 patients on trolleys wait for attention at an nhs a&e department.
 patients on trolleys wait for attention at an nhs a&e department. photograph: david sillitoe for the guardian
rachel ellis

sat 16 dec ‘17 20.30 gmt last modified on sat 16 dec ‘17 23.30 gmt
 view more sharing options
shares
151
comments
198
imagine if there were an app that reduced accident and emergency waiting times, ensured women are followed up after childbirth and even identified when hospital patients need to be transferred to intensive care.

these were some of the innovative ideas generated by more than 100 nhs doctors, dentists, technology developers, scientists and health economists at an unprecedented blue-sky thinking event that aimed to explore new possibilities in care in the digital age.

the task at the nhs ideas lab hackathon was to find 21st-century solutions to problems facing patients, doctors and the nhs. issues addressed included long waits for a&e, paper records that can get mislaid and lengthy processes that slow down patient care and increase the possibility of human error. a new innovation fund worth £100,000 has been set up to support some of the best ideas.


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
dr umar ahmad, an a&e doctor at the royal london hospital, was part of a team at the hackathon that came up with the idea of an app to speed up a&e waiting times. he said: “we need to streamline processes by using new technology, while at the same time maintaining high standards of patient care.

“in 15 years’ time artificial intelligence will be part of the nhs, but there are things we can do now to make our jobs a little bit easier and better for patients too.”

anaesthetist dr tim knowles, who also attended the event, added: “the technology is moving forward but we have hundreds of legacy systems. this means everything gets patched together with the electronic version of sellotape but it doesn’t work very well. clinicians have ideas about how to improve systems but the hackathon gave us the opportunity to find out realistically what is possible and understand how apps work.”

the hackathon, which took place in london last month, is the first to be organised by the pharmaceutical company boehringer ingelheim since becoming a sponsor this year of the nhs clinical entrepreneur programme, set up by nhs england and health education england two years ago to offer doctors and other health professionals the chance to develop their entrepreneurial aspirations while continuing to work in the nhs.

advertisement

professor tony young, national clinical lead for innovation at nhs england, said: “it was a remarkable success, and directly supports our programme to support clinical entrepreneurs, which offers opportunities for doctors and other health professionals to develop their innovative aspirations.

“we are committed to finding new ways to improve care so patients can directly benefit from the creativity and talent of our workforce.”

managed by the apperta foundation, a not-for-profit community interest company set up by health professionals in 2015 to improve technology in health and social care, the fund is open to social enterprises looking to improve health outcomes, address unmet needs and enhance the care and experience of patients with long-term conditions.

sabine nikolaus from boehringer ingelheim said: “by making the most of the intellectual capital in the nhs and technology sector, we can unearth new concepts which can make a difference to patients, the nhs and all those who deliver healthcare.

“we are thrilled with the ideas that emerged at the hackathon and can’t wait to see the best of these stand the chance of adoption in clinical practice.”

three ways to improve patient care
monitoring new mums

 a maternity ward at liverpool women's hospital.
facebook twitter pinterest
 a maternity ward at liverpool women’s hospital. photograph: sarah lee for the guardian
around a third of women will have an epidural – a local anaesthetic administered into the back – to relieve the pain of childbirth. although the treatment is very effective, there can be side-effects such as headache and nerve damage, so there should always be a follow-up before mothers are discharged from hospital. currently, there is no national system for this.

advertisement

according to anaesthetist dr tim knowles, in some cases notes about patients are simply written in a diary for the next shift for follow up, or entered on databases managed by individual doctors. “there are lots of points of failure in the system; you might forget to put the patient details in the book because you are so busy, which means that patient doesn’t exist in terms of follow-up, or the diary can get lost,” he said. “this means follow-up is variable and that’s a problem because we don’t want to miss a serious complication that we could have done something about.” to improve patient safety and generate useful patient data on complications, he and the epidural anaesthetics team came up with the idea of an app that stores all information about epidural follow-ups to a central dashboard using the ruby on rails server.

reducing a&e waiting times
lengthy waits for a&e are commonplace in the nhs. with two million patients going through the system each month, the nhs target of treating 95% of patients within four hours has not been met since 2015.

according to dr umar ahmad, an a&e doctor at the royal london hospital, part of the problem is the delay getting medical test results back: it takes a lab about an hour to process a blood test. he and his team came up with the idea of an app that identifies which tests a patient needs as soon as they arrive in a&e.

the algorithm generates a barcode that the patient can scan using their mobile phone and this directs them to the right part of the a&e department to get tests done. the idea is that, by the time their turn comes, doctors have all the information they need to make a diagnosis. “it can take an hour-and-a-half or even longer for patients who are not immediately sick just to find out which tests they need to have done,” said dr ahmad. “if tests are done early, by the time the patient sees the doctor they will have the information they need to make a diagnosis, admit a patient to hospital or refer to a specialist.

“even if we could apply this approach to 20% of a&e patients, it would have a huge effect on waiting times as well as helping medical staff.”

early warning for deteriorating patients
when patients in hospital take a turn for the worse, their condition should be picked up by the national early warning score (news) system. however, this mostly paper-based system relies on patients’ observations and the news score being correctly calculated, and then finding appropriate medical staff.

according to anaesthetist dr jakob mathiszig-lee, even if every stage is carried out correctly, it can take more than an hour to get deteriorating patients to critical care.

“identifying patients who are deteriorating from sepsis and other serious conditions and then flagging it up appropriately is a problem in the uk,” explained mathiszig-lee. “there are cases when by the time i get told about a patient, their condition is irretrievable.”

he and his team came up with the idea of vitalflag – a real-time text alert system to warn critical care staff directly that a patient is deteriorating.

“our idea was to find a way to speed up the process,” he said, “going directly from entering the patient’s data to flagging it up with the critical care team.”

members of lowestoft coalition against the cuts (lcac) gathered for a public meeting on december 4, to discuss the sustainability and transformation plan (stp), which would see the various arms of norfolk and waveney’s nhs work more closely with local councils and other organisations.

the plan, which would see the relevant changes made by 2021, includes explanations for how the nhs would make use of its resources as efficiently as possible.

among the measures pledged is the provision of more services in general practice and communities so that hospitals can focus on specialist and emergency care, as well as further integrating health and social care so that people can receive coordinated support at home where possible.

in attendance at the waveney tuc-supported meeting was bill adnams, a long-time campaigner on nhs issues and member of the keep our nhs public group.

mr adnams stated that this latest nhs reorganisation was difficult to understand, but one that is “about cuts to services and privatisation.”

he said: “the stps determine that the nhs will have to survive in a market system alongside private companies.

“the last nhs reforms - closing hospitals and selling them off - didn’t work. ‘care in the community’ was just a slogan and the result has been neither better nor cheaper.”

the meeting also saw frank joyce, secretary of lcac, questioning the way the stp was introduced. he said: “why has there been no explanation or apology for the cuts, mismanagement and suffering caused by the last reorganisation?

“to embark on another costly and disruptive reorganisation is insane.”

the new vision for norfolk and waveney includes a desire to help the region’s three main hospitals to become more sustainable by working more closely together, while there will be better utilisation of technology with consultations via skype or facetime.

a spokesman for the stp said: “the plan focuses on helping individuals to stay as healthy as possible while supporting more people – especially those with long-term conditions – to live independently at home. it sets out the changes which will manage demand while making sure everyone can access high quality services which meet their needs.”

this countdown of those we count on will focus on a different person or individual every day up until christmas, celebrating our healthcare heroes.

christine hawkins, matron for palliative care, norfolk community health and care trust (nchc)

christine has worked within the nhs for 40 years plus and has always put patients at the centre, dedicating her nursing career to improving patients’ and families’ experiences. 

advertising


she has worked within inpatients, community, walk-in centre, prison service and recently her later years have been working within palliative care where she has played a leading role in developing the palliative care services whilst working with key stakeholders to grow the service.

she will spend time talking and supporting staff, empowering them to grow. christine is a leader, a clinician a manager, and above all a nurse who has dedicated her career to enriching the lives of patients, their families, and enabling staff to grow in their chosen health care field.

one week into winter and health service pressures have been deemed “simply unsafe” by experts, after the first instalment of the nhs’s weekly winter progress report.

around one in 20 hospital beds (5.5 per cent) in england are available as the nhs heads towards christmas, posing major questions about its ability to respond as seasonal pressures increase.

the nhs confederation, which represents organisations across the health service, said the figures “tell a very alarming story at this stage in winter – hospitals are nearly full”.

advertising

inread invented by teads
read more
nhs ‘sleepwalking into winter crisis’ as waiting times soar
nhs needs £500m bailout to cope with coming winter crisis, says labour
hospitals across uk cancelling ‘urgent’ cancer ops amid nhs crisis
the figures come from nhs england’s first weekly winter operational update of the year, a run down of how the service is coping; including flu related deaths, ambulance delays, and beds quarantined in outbreaks of diarrhoea and vomiting.

nhs england wrote to trusts in july with directives for this winter that said bed occupancy nationally should not exceed an average of 92 per cent.

but the standard used by experts, and set out in an earlier national audit office review on hospital demand, has said that trusts with occupancy regularly over 85 per cent risk “bed crises” and greater levels of hospital-acquired infections.

what happened to susan boyle?
thebrofessional.net
it was the most iconic line of all time, but he was never meant to say it at all
smartied
the henry viii quiz: will you score higher than average?
howstuffworks
  by taboola sponsored links 
the fact that the nhs is already exceeding both targets nationally is cause for concern, but quarterly data, published in september and broken down by trust, shows four areas were already running at more than 98 per cent capacity.

this is despite a £1bn government investment in social care provided in the spring budget to speed up the discharge of patients from hospital into the community.

high bed occupancy is a particular concern with the nhs on high alert for a particularly bad bout of winter flu, after hospitals in australia and new zealand dealt with record numbers of cases during their winter season.

doctors’ leaders said today that a sudden cold snap could mean the system “would really struggle”.

advertising

inread invented by teads
however nhs trust representative body, nhs providers, said the extra effort put into winter preparations earlier this year had helped, even though performance is running roughly similar to last year.

the labour party focused on the delays in ambulances being able to handover patients to hospitals, warning that the nhs faces a “winter of misery” with more than 10,000 patients waiting at least 30 minutes outside a&es last week.

a fifth of these waits lasted more than an hour.


read more
the nhs is about to ration its services due to lack of funding
this is despite the nhs writing to trusts warning that delayed handovers between ambulances and a&es would be a national priority to prevent a repeat of last year’s record waits.

a fortnight ago chancellor philip hammond awarded the nhs £335m “for pressures this winter” in the autumn budget, despite nhs england chief executive simon stevens asking for the £350m a week pledged by brexit campaigners.

nhs confederation chief executive niall dickson said of the figures: “this level of system pressure is quite simply unsafe and is putting patients at risk.

“there is a real human cost here. on two days in november there was only one paediatric intensive care unit bed available in the whole of london.

“parents who have spent months preparing their children for urgent operations are turning up at hospital only to be told they have been cancelled.”

chris hopson, chief executive of nhs providers said their winter plans are “being put to the test” but the early preparation was paying off.


nhs england boss demands £350m-a-week promised by leave voters
“it is very early days but it is clearly a concern that bed occupancy – with an average rate of 94.5 per cent – is already running so high as we head into what is usually the busiest time of the year.

“most indicators that can be compared to last year suggest that we are in a similar – or slightly better – position than at the same stage last year.

“this is welcome and shows that, given demand is growing, the amount of preparation ahead of winter undertaken by nhs trusts and national bodies is already proving helpful.”

an nhs england spokesperson said: “the nhs has prepared for winter this year more intensely than ever before, developing robust plans to manage expected increased pressures, as well as create contingency plans to cover exceptional surges in demand.” 

screaming blue murder: we join a london ambulance crew for the busiest nightshift of the year
4
show all
they added that the public should ensure they have had their flu vaccinations and turn to services like the nhs 111 helpline for non-urgent medical advice.

labour shadow health secretary jonathan ashworth said: “after an inadequate budget for the nhs, healthcare leaders warned of an imminent and unprecedented winter crisis.

“today’s data reveals a stark picture of what lies ahead: a winter of misery for patients and unparalleled pressures on our nhs staff.”

british medical association chair, dr chaand nagpaul, said: “these figures show a service under huge pressure with little or no spare capacity as the nhs approaches its busiest time of the year.

“the concern is that that if there is a serious flu outbreak or cold snap the system would really struggle to deal with a spike in demand.”


nhs bosses have been accused of unacceptable secrecy after deciding no longer to reveal how many hospitals come under such pressure during winter that they have to declare an alert.

nhs england will not publish this winter’s figures for the number of trusts forced to issue an alert under the operational pressures escalation levels (opel) framework system.

the disclosure last winter that dozens of nhs trusts in england had to issue black alerts – signalling they could not cope with a surge in demand for care – received widespread media coverage. conditions in hospitals became so stretched last january that the british red cross called it a humanitarian crisis.


nhs bosses sound alarm over hospitals already running at 99% capacity
 read more
the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “it is entirely unacceptable that the true extent of the crisis may not be fully revealed because of a failure to publish details of which trusts have been forced to issue alerts. ministers must be held accountable for their appalling failure to properly fund our nhs as it heads into another difficult winter.”

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb, a health minister in the 2010-15 coalition government, said any cover-up by the government over nhs performance would be “a real scandal”.

lamb said: “there are serious questions as to why figures on trusts under pressure appears to have been dropped from the latest batch of data. it would be a real scandal if the government is trying to cover-up evidence that the nhs is under unsustainable pressure. we need to know immediately when these figures will be made available.”

the guardian has asked both nhs england and the department of health who was involved in the decision and to answer the accusation of burying bad news.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



england’s 153 nhs acute hospital trusts are still using the opel system, which can lead to a hospital shutting its a&e temporarily or sending ambulances elsewhere, or to it receiving extra help.

the change in policy emerged on thursday when nhs england issued the first set of weekly figures showing how hospitals are performing this winter.

in an accompanying statement it defended the decision, saying it was publishing more data this year than in previous winters. “the nhs nationally has introduced a new system this year for identifying, and acting upon, heightened operational pressures over winter,” it said. “this is centred around the new national emergency pressures panel, chaired by sir bruce keogh, and its decisions about raising, or reducing, their assessments of pressure will be made transparently and published.”

the figures show that 10,184 people had to wait at least half an hour in the back of an ambulance last week because a&e units were so busy. under new nhs rules, hospitals are supposed to ensure such delays never happen.

between 27 november and 3 december, 8,340 people waited in an ambulance for 30-60 minutes and another 1,844 waited for more than an hour.

ashworth said the figures “reveal the dire impact tory underfunding is already having on thousands of patients unable to promptly access a&e departments right across the country. some trusts are already completely full with no spare beds, an extremely worrying indicator for what is still to come.”


labour demands commons vote on 'secret' plan for nhs
 read more
nhs england and nhs improvement wrote to all 240 nhs trusts in england on 7 november telling them to ensure no patient ended up being cared for in a corridor or having to wait 12 hours on a trolley to be admitted this winter.

they also made clear that acute hospitals should prepare their a&e units so that “patients do not wait more than 15 minutes in ambulances before being handed over to the hospital”. trust bosses denounced the regulators’ approach as “barking mad” and unrealistic, given the intense pressures hospitals are under.

the figures also show that hospitals in england were 94.5% full last week – far over the 85% limit that is regarded as the maximum in order to ensure safety.

“it is very early days but it is clearly a concern that bed occupancy – with an average rate of 94.5% – is already running so high as we head into what into what is usually the busiest time of year”, said chris hopson, the chief executive of nhs providers, which represents hospitals.

the royal college of nursing said the figures “make depressing reading for both patients and staff”.

“having so few free beds also means it’s far more difficult to admit patients to the right ward for their condition”, said janet davies, the union’s chief executive.

the figures also show:

a&e units at five different nhs trusts were so busy they had to temporarily divert patients to a nearby hospital last week. manchester university and gloucestershire hospitals nhs trusts did that three times each.
an average of 790 beds, both occupied and unoccupied, were shut each day because of an outbreak of norovirus, the diarrhoea and vomiting bug.
no a&e unit had to close completely because it could not cope with a surge in demand from patients needing care.
an nhs england spokesperson said: “the nhs has prepared for winter this year more intensely than ever before, developing robust plans to manage expected increased pressures, as well as create contingency plans to cover exceptional surges in demand.”

unexpected deaths and safety fears in private hospitals should be made more transparent for patients in order to prevent more cases like that of the rogue surgeon ian paterson, the royal college of surgeons has said.

the college called for a review of safety standards in the private sector after it emerged that paterson – who was convicted last month of unlawfully wounding private patients by carrying out needless operations – was allowed to continue working as a surgeon for more than a decade despite concerns being raised about his practices.

in an letter to the government, the rcs said private healthcare patients had less information about safety concerns in privately run hospitals than those in the nhs.

in april a jury at nottingham crown court found paterson guilty of 17 counts of wounding with intent and three of unlawful wounding. paterson carried out thousands of needless breast operations on patients who trusted his “brilliant bedside manner”.


ian paterson: the 'likeable' breast surgeon who wounded his patients
 read more
“the ian paterson case raises the question of how standards of practice, consent and patient safety are assured, particularly in the private sector where many of his patients were treated. in particular there is a question about the data available from private hospitals,” the letter states. 

the body welcomed jeremy hunt’s call for an inquiry into how paterson was able to practise for so long. the letter adds: “in particular we need to ask how and why those working closely with ian paterson did not spot his behaviour or were unwilling to challenge it. we will continue to support a culture in the health service which encourages staff to speak up.”

the private sector should be forced to report similar patient safety data as the nhs, including unexpected deaths and serious injuries, said the surgeons. they said private hospitals should report “never events” – mistakes so serious they should never happen – in the same way as nhs hospitals.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



they also called for new legislation to better regulate cosmetic surgery to ensure surgeons are property qualified.

clare marx, the president of the rcs, said: “ian paterson wilfully abused the trust placed in him by patients at their most vulnerable. his actions and behaviour were appalling and we must do everything in our power to prevent such a violation being repeated.”

she stressed that the “overwhelming majority” of doctors worked with “diligence and commitment” and modern medical practice meant rogue doctors were more likely to be identified than in the past. but she added: “there are still a number of areas which require urgent improvements to protect patients from harm. robust regulation remains an important way of protecting the public.”

paterson is due to be sentenced at nottingham crown court this month.

nhs lothian has recorded the worst performance for a&e waiting time targets since the publication of weekly figures began almost three years ago.

the collapse in its figures follows an admission its acute hospitals had previously under-reported waits.

in the latest weekly figures, just 77.3% of patients were dealt with within the four-hour target.

before the misreporting came to light in october the health board had been meeting the government's target of 95%.

at the beginning of 2015, the scottish government began publishing a&e waiting times every week as a response to concerns about poor performance in some health boards.

bbc research published last week showed that over the past three years scotland's a&e departments were the best performing anywhere in the uk.

breached guidelines
it showed that scotland had maintained its performance as england's figures had slumped.

however, a question mark was raised over how nhs lothian reported its figures and it was found to have breached guidelines.

the health board has now recorded the worst figures for a health board since weekly reporting was brought in.

it missed the four-hour target for almost a quarter of all patients attending a&e.

the royal infirmary of edinburgh had the poorest performance of any hospital in scotland, seeing less than two-thirds (64.1%) of patients on time. lothian's other general a&e fared better at 86.6%.

overall, scotland's accident and emergency departments recorded their worst performance since march 2015.

the figures for the week ending 10 december showed that 86.9% of patients were dealt with within four hours.

nhs forth valley (83.4%) and nhs greater glasgow and clyde (84.9%) reported figures well below the 95% target.

winter pressures
health secretary shona robison said outbreaks of flu and slips and trips because of black ice had led to extra pressure on hospitals in recent weeks.

she said the scottish government was working with nhs lothian to help tackle waiting times and delayed discharges at the royal infirmary of edinburgh (rie) by helping identify specific issues and providing solutions.

nhs lothian's deputy chief executive, jim crombie, said: like a number of other health boards, nhs lothian is experiencing significant winter pressures across our whole healthcare system.

there are a number of contributing factors, including the increasing complexity of cases presenting at emergency departments and significant numbers of delayed discharges.

this new way of working will allow us to zoom in on processes and procedures, not just in the emergency department, but across the acute care system to help improve patient flow through our hospitals.

fewer patients in scotland are waiting longer than four hours in a&e than they did in 2012/3 in contrast to england where the number has more than doubled, according to new research by the bbc.

it found england had a 155% rise in long waits between 2012/3 and this year, up to 2.5 million a year.

hospitals in wales and northern ireland also saw an increase over the period.

in scotland, the number of patients waiting more than four hours fell by 9% to just over 100,000.

long a&e waits double in four years
nhs waits for cancer care, a&e and ops worsen across uk
nhs lothian a&e waiting times have been under-reported
the statistics show the total number of visits to accident and emergency departments in scotland increased slightly to 1,629,426 in the year to november.

chart
nhs targets give hospitals four hours in which to treat and discharge or admit or transfer a patient.

they are expected to do that in 95% of cases.


if you can't see the nhs tracker, click or tap here.

presentational grey line
scottish a&es were the closest of the uk nations to hitting the 95% target, managing to deal with 93.9% of cases within four hours - up from 93.2% in 2012/3.

in england, there were almost 1.7 million more patients attending a&e than four years ago, a rise of 7.8%.

only 136,364 extra were treated within the four-hour target, meaning almost 1.6 million more patients were outside the limit.

as a consequence, england went from meeting the 95% target in 2012-13 to reaching just 89.1% in the latest data.

some english regions were closer to the 95% target, such as the north east with 94.4%.

wales was already missing the waiting time target in 2012/13, seeing 89.1% of patients within four hours. this fell to 82.6% in 2016/17.

northern ireland was also already missing the waiting time target in 2012/13, seeing 77.6% of patients within four hours across the period. this fell further to 75.6% in the latest 12 months.

the scottish government said scotland's higher level of performance was partly due to the six essential actions programme, designed to share best practice in the nhs.

health secretary shona robison added: we've also provided £30m additional investment over the three years of this programme that has supported the appointment of dedicated national and local teams to focus on improving patient flow, ensuring that once people arrive into a&e, they can be admitted or transferred in a timely way.

this has been enhanced by additional winter investment each year to support resilience across nhs scotland - with an additional £5m to support resilience across health and social care services this winter.

presentational grey line
analysis by shelley jofre, bbc scotland health correspondent

hospital wardimage copyrightpa
health secretary shona robison often proclaims scotland's a&e departments are the best performing anywhere in the uk. these new figures certainly seem to back that up.

since 2013 the number of patients seen within four hours has risen slightly, while the number waiting longer is down nearly 9%. contrast with england, which has seen a dramatic 155% rise in people waiting longer than the target time.

so what explains the big difference? england's population has grown faster than scotland's in the last four years (3.3% compared to 1.7%) so that's one reason. but it clearly doesn't tell the whole story.

while scotland faces the same problems in recruiting family doctors as the rest of the uk, it has more gps per head of population than the rest of the uk.

intriguingly, this research shows the number of a&e admissions has barely changed in scotland over four years, while in england it's risen by nearly 8%. it could be that if patients in scotland find it easier to get a gp appointment, fewer of them end up in a&e with minor ailments.

the nuffield trust health charity says the difference north and south of the border could also, in part, be explained by lower spending on social care in england and a continuing problem there with delayed discharges from hospital.

its research suggests it's not about how many people attend a&e but about difficulties in admitting people when the main hospital is full. in england, the proportion of hospital beds occupied on average is higher than in scotland.

the scottish government puts its a&e performance down to a tight focus in recent years on making sure patients are admitted or transferred in a timely way, backed up by an extra £30m of investment.

even so, the research shows on the two 12-month periods studied scotland still fell short of the target of seeing 95% of people within four hours.

and of course it comes in the week it was revealed a&e waiting times have been routinely under-reported in lothian and prof sir harry burns said it wouldn't surprise him if the massaging of waiting time figures in the nhs was common.

health secretary shona robison has ordered an independent review into how waiting times are recorded at st john's hospital in livingston.

concerns about the hospital's a&e department were raised by a whistleblower in october.

following an immediate nhs lothian investigation, ordered by ms robison, areas of concern were found.

nhs lothian said it was encouraged that staff had felt able to raise concerns about the hospital.

ms robison has now asked the scottish academy of medical royal colleges to carry out an external review.

nhs lothian said staff at the a&e unit had been applying locally produced guidelines for recording patients who have to wait for more than four hours.

these local practices did not comply with national guidance.

'serious allegations'
the internal investigation report said: local procedures were drafted with the best of intentions of clarifying to staff when a patient has, or has not, breached the four-hour access target.

according to nhs lothian, this meant some patients who may have been recorded as breaching the waiting time performance target, were not included in departmental performance reports.

the independent inquiry will be led by prof derek bell.

the health secretary said: these are serious allegations and the early findings are clearly a cause for concern.

that is why i have asked prof bell to lead an independent review of these allegations.

we are working very closely with the board to ensure that lessons are learned from the investigation and recommendations made are fully implemented as soon as possible and shared across nhs scotland.

nhs lothian has promised to fully cooperate with the independent inquiry.

'clear assurances'
deputy chief executive jim crombie said: we actively encourage our staff in nhs lothian to highlight issues relating to patient safety and we take any allegations of misconduct or wrongdoing very seriously.

we have a robust whistleblowing policy in place to ensure that all our staff are supported and feel able to raise any concerns and i am encouraged that staff are able to discuss them.

as soon as we received these concerns, an internal audit team was appointed, headed by a senior non-executive director to oversee the investigation and get to the bottom of the concerns.

lothian msp and scottish conservatives health spokesman miles briggs said: the concerns about how a&e waiting times are recorded at st john's are extremely serious and alarming and therefore it is right that the scottish government has ordered an independent inquiry into the allegations.

i hope that this independent review will be completed as thoroughly as possible and also without delay. if the review recommends that changes are needed in the system at st john's then these must also be implemented immediately and nhs lothian and scottish ministers need to ensure this takes place.

west lothian residents will be looking for very clear reassurances that the current system of recording a&e waiting times at the local hospital so many of them rely on has not been designed to minimise or mask excessive waits that break the scottish government's four-hour target.

scottish labour's health spokesman anas sarwar said: these are deeply troubling findings that will concern patients across nhs lothian and beyond.

it is absolutely right that they are independently investigated. but the reality is snp mismanagement has left nhs staff across scotland over-worked, under-valued and under-resourced.

geoff mann is about to mark 10 years as a volunteer at north tyneside general hospital. the retired chartered quantity surveyor does a day a week, sometimes more, driving patients and visitors with mobility needs around the hospital in north shields in an electric buggy.

“it’s what everybody says – the enormous sense of satisfaction,” says mann, 77, when asked what he gets out of it. “you meet a lot of people, you help them get around, you put them at ease if they’re worried – and you feel you’re part of one big family.”


eleanor smith mp: ‘nhs staff are undervalued – and demoralised’
 read more
for michael hume, another driver, volunteering for almost four years now has helped him regain confidence after a serious accident. “i wasn’t good in big groups,” says the 52-year-old former forklift operator. “this has picked me up more than anything.”

north tyneside is run by northumbria healthcare nhs foundation trust, one of five trusts in a pilot programme endorsed and funded by nhs england (nhse) aiming to make volunteering an integral part of healthcare. although volunteers have been a feature of the nhs since its inception, their roles have typically been limited to running the hospital shop or pushing a trolley around the wards.

this is different. “generally there’s a lot of ‘nice’ stuff. but is it high impact? no – it’s at the margins,” says sir tom hughes-hallett, the philanthropist behind the programme. “i thought we could really shift the dial on this, recast volunteering for the 21st century and help the nhs more effectively tackle the ever-mounting health challenges it faces.”

the plan, which has the backing of nhs leaders and an impressive line-up of charity and corporate supporters, is to use volunteers to ease “pinch points” in the patient’s progress through the healthcare system – from the queue at a hospital reception or delays in discharge caused by lack of transport to making someone available to collect prescriptions from the hospital pharmacy. they could also be part of wards, meeting patient needs that paid staff have no time to address.

even three years ago, staff at my trust didn’t know what to do with volunteers. but now they are bursting with ideas

hughes-hallett has set up a non-profit community interest company, helpforce, to develop the pilot programme and to coordinate and grow volunteering initiatives across the nhs in england. in all, 12 trusts – including the five in the pilot – have joined an initial network supporting the broader ambition to double the number of volunteers in hospitals from an estimated 78,000 to more than 150,000 by 2021.

“that will give the nhs one volunteer for every 10 staff,” says hughes-hallett, who chairs the chelsea and westminster hospital foundation trust in west london, another of the pilot sites. “i think that will make a huge difference to the stress and exhaustion of the workforce.”

it is precisely that exhaustion, after seven years of austerity and growing pressure on the nhs to meet the needs of the ageing population, that makes him optimistic about his plan. health workers, and especially their trade unions, have traditionally been suspicious of volunteers encroaching on professional roles.

but now the prospect of having extra pairs of hands is revealing a very different attitude, he reports. at his own trust, staff are “biting our hands off” to add volunteers to their teams. “even three years ago they would have said, ‘what are we going do with them?’ now they are bursting with ideas. it’s totally changed.”


key to this new attitude is likely to be helpforce’s guarantee that volunteers will never replace staff – “i have made that absolute commitment to the unions,” says hughes-hallett – and its ambition that they will always be safe and reliable. it is working with health education england, the health sector training body, on the idea of certified courses for volunteers. the pilot sites, moreover, are required to involve local staff representatives in creating volunteer roles. “unless this is something that the unions think is going to benefit their members, it isn’t going to work,” hughes-hallett declares.

hughes-hallett describes the royal college of nursing as “very supportive” and has invited it to join the helpforce advisory council. at public services union unison, head of health, sara gorton, expresses support for the principle of volunteering, but adds: “unison is keen to work with helpforce to ensure that the role of volunteers is limited to tasks that don’t compromise patient safety or take paid staff away from their core work.”


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
hughes-hallett, 63, was a successful investment banker who sold his business in 2000 and became chief executive of cancer care charity marie curie. it was during his 12 years there that he came to appreciate the value and potential of volunteers. in summer last year, he pitched the helpforce blueprint to health service leaders including nhs chief executive, simon stevens, who endorsed it.

the pilot programme, which also includes sandwell and west birmingham hospitals trust, university hospital southampton foundation trust and west suffolk foundation trust, is being funded by £250,000 from nhs england. hughes-hallett says he has put in a sum “in the low six figures” and a bid has been made for lottery funding, an undisclosed sum, for the four-strong central team working alongside him.

among helpforce’s supporting organisations is the royal voluntary service (rvs), which already provides some 5,000 volunteers for hospitals across britain. catherine johnstone, rvs chief executive, says: “we’ve been there a long time, we have a big footprint – but the complexity of the challenges now facing hospitals means we have to pull together and have more focus. without a national initiative like this, that’s very difficult.”

helpforce is also looking to recruit a more diverse volunteer base than groups like rvs have been able to do. georgia hutton, 28, has been volunteering as a “meeter and greeter” at north tyneside for more than five years, but admits she is unusual in having decided to try it after graduating from university without firm career plans.

“i don’t know why more young people don’t do it: i think it’s great,” says hutton, who is also training to be a counsellor and working part-time as a receptionist. “a lot of the people who come in are elderly, and maybe have no one else at home, so sometimes i just sit and have a little chat with them.”

hutton chooses to volunteer one afternoon a fortnight. at chelsea and westminster, katie lillie, 38, helps out on the busy main reception between 10am and 2pm on wednesdays, which fits in with her children’s school hours. offering such flexibility will be crucial to attracting younger volunteers and those from more diverse ethnic backgrounds, the helpforce team recognises, but can you match people’s preferences with those “pinch points” in the system?

 how the voluntary sector can save an overstretched nhs
paul woodward
 read more
rachael allsop, chelsea and westminster’s director of volunteering, thinks you can. helping patients eat and drink at lunchtime is critical to their speedy recovery, she points out, while weekends in hospital “can be desperate” if there are no activities. “bridging the gap between late afternoon and usual visiting time is another great opportunity for younger volunteers, including students looking to have it on their cv,” she says.

allsop has a target of increasing the number of volunteers at chelsea and westminster from 350 to 900 by 2020. that looks daunting, but hughes-hallett is convinced the tide is running strongly in helpforce’s favour. “it’s already been the most extraordinary journey,” he says. “i don’t think i’ve ever done anything more exciting in my life.”

stephen hawking has reignited his public dispute with jeremy hunt by joining a legal action aimed at scuppering an nhs shake-up that he fears will lead to greater privatisation and rationing of resources.

the physicist has become a party to a lawsuit that is seeking to stop the introduction of the first accountable care organisations (acos) into the nhs in england in april.

“i am concerned that accountable care organisations are an attack on the fundamental principles of the nhs,” hawking told the guardian, explaining his move.

 these little-known opaque bodies could run health services. are they legal?
denis campbell
 read more
“they have not been established by statute, and they appear to be being used for reducing public expenditure, for cutting services and for allowing private companies to receive and benefit from significant sums of public money for organising and providing services.”

acos have aroused suspicion among labour mps and nhs campaigners because they are modelled on organisations of the same name that play a key role in healthcare in some parts of the us.

hawking and hunt became embroiled in a war of words in august after hawking used a guardian article to accuse the conservatives of causing the nhs’s difficulties by underfunding it and hunt of “cherrypicking” and misrepresenting research findings to suit his arguments.

hunt claimed on twitter and in a newspaper piece that hawking, a “personal hero” to him, had wrongly claimed that the nhs was heading towards a “us-style insurance system”, saying there was no evidence to back this up.

 jeremy hunt at downing street this week
facebook twitter pinterest
 jeremy hunt at downing street this week. photograph: andy rain/epa
hawking has become a “proposed claimant” alongside four academics and nhs campaigners, known as the judicial review group. they hope high court judges will grant them a judicial review to stop hunt and nhs england bringing in acos without the move first being subjected to public consultation and scrutiny by parliament.

“i am joining this legal action because the nhs is being taken in a direction which i oppose, as i stated in august, without proper public and parliamentary scrutiny, consultations and debate,” said hawking.

“i want the attention of the people of england to be drawn to what is happening and for those who are entrusted with responsibility for the nhs to account openly for themselves in public, and to be judged accordingly.”

 jeremy hunt can attack me all he wants – but he is wrong to say the nhs is working
stephen hawking
 read more
the intervention will focus attention on acos, which have so far generated little media coverage or political interest. they have been promoted by simon stevens, the chief executive of nhs england, and backed by the government, as a key part of his five year forward view blueprint to modernise the nhs and help it stay within budget.

nhs england says acos are simply a new way of ensuring that different types of health service bodies can work together, and with providers of social care services, in an area to integrate care to benefit patients’ health. but those behind the legal challenge fear acos could ultimately gain control of budgets worth billions of pounds and restrict access to care in order to avoid overshooting their budgets.

advertisement

prof sir bruce keogh, nhs england’s medical director, has claimed acos will end unhelpful fractures between different services and stop patients being “passed from pillar to post”. but he has recognised the difficulty of trying to persuade the public of their benefits.

allyson pollock, a professor of public health and one of the four people who instigated the legal action in october, said: “we are honoured and delighted that prof stephen hawking, who cares so deeply about the nhs, is joining this legal action. the full details of these acos must be published and consulted on before they progress any further. this should be the first rule of good and transparent administration for the nhs.”

she added: “if jeremy hunt and simon stevens won’t budge, then this is the moment that everybody needs to come together and say clearly that the nhs is ours, and that we are going to fight to keep it that way.”

the department of health said: “we strongly resist the misleading claims in this action; it is irresponsible scaremongering to suggest that accountable care organisations are being used to support privatisation and harm the fundamental principles of the nhs.

“the nhs will remain a taxpayer-funded system free at the point of use; acos are simply about making care more joined-up between different health and care organisations.”

hospitals are being turned into long-stay institutions, amid a crisis in social care, with more than 17,000 people now stuck on hospital wards for at least three weeks, official figures show.

the nhs figures show that across the country, bed occupancy levels are already approaching 95 per cent, with 18 hospital trusts reaching 100 per cent capacity last week.

the new data - the first ever analysis of the numbers stuck in hospital for such periods - shows the number of “long stay patients” already rising as winter sets in.

nhs trust chief executives said pensioners admitted to wards with relatively minor health problems were ending up dispatched to care homes, weeks later, because they had lost so much mobility while trapped needlessly.

–– advertisement ––




in many cases, elderly people were ending up in such institutions when they could have left hospital weeks earlier, if only they had been given help at home, they said.

the statistics show some nhs trusts with hundreds of “long stay” patients, with more than 500 such cases at leeds teaching hospitals trust, and more than 480 at barts health trust in london.

they also show 20,000 ambulance delays in the last fortnight, prompting labour to warn of a “winter of misery” ahead.

one nhs trust chief executive said lack of social care meant far too many “long stay” patients were stuck in hospital for lack of help at home, rather than medical need.

“at any one time, i’ve got 250 beds full of people staying longer than 20 days, mainly people who are elderly,” she said, warning that far too many cases were there for lack of social care.

nhs trusts were focussing their efforts on trying to get short stay patients out even quicker, she said, because the problem of long stays was so intractable.

even an extra week in hospital for want of care at home could have devastating consequences, another said, with a patient who could have lived independently ending up in a care home.

“at first, a patient is well enough to be discharged, as long as they get a care package. then they stay a week longer and they need a care home, another week and they need a nursing home,” said a second trust chief executive, speaking on condition of anonymity.

chris hopson, chief executive of nhs providers, which represents hospital trusts, said: “we know that a lot of trusts have patients who are ready to be discharged but can not leave because there isn’t suitable care available. some say recent care-home closures have made the problem even more difficult.

why is the nhs under so much pressure?
an ageing population. there are one million more people over the age of 65 than five years ago. this has caused a surge in demand for medical care

cuts to budgets for social care. while the nhs budget has been protected, social services for home helps and other care have fallen by 11 per cent in five years. this has caused record levels of “bedblocking”; people with no medical need to be in hospital are stuck there because they can’t be supported at home

staff shortages. while hospital doctor and nurse numbers have risen over the last decade, they have not kept pace with the rise in demand. meanwhile 2016 saw record numbers of gp practices close, displacing patients on to a&e departments as they seek medical advice

lifestyle factors. drinking too much alcohol, smoking, a poor diet with not enough fruit and vegetables and not doing enough exercise are all major reasons for becoming unwell and needing to rely on our health services. growing numbers of overweight children show this problem is currently set to continue.

organisations. photograph: niklas halle'n/afp/getty images
fri 15 dec ‘17 13.48 gmt last modified on fri 15 dec ‘17 14.41 gmt
 view more sharing options
shares
81
comments
52
the war over the future of the nhs is being fought on multiple fronts. campaigners, the labour party, the government, nhs england and even stephen hawking are locked in combat over the structure, funding, transparency, accountability and legality of the current wave of reforms, along with the never-ending fight about privatisation – real or imagined.

the famous physicist has joined campaigners in a high court bid to block the introduction of accountable care organisations to oversee local services without primary legislation, arguing they could lead to privatisation, rationing and charging.

meanwhile, the shadow health secretary, jon ashworth, has tabled a commons early day motion after the government announced plans to amend regulations to support the operation of accountable care organisations. ashworth argues that they are a profound change to the nhs that should be debated in parliament.


labour demands commons vote on 'secret' plan for nhs
 read more
accountable care – a term imported from the us, where it plays a key role in obamacare – can take many forms, but it typically involves an alliance of providers with a fixed budget collaborating to manage the health needs of their local population. nhs england wants to see sustainability and transformation partnerships (stps) evolving into accountable care systems in which integrated care supports good physical and mental health.

in june, nhs england announced that eight areas would be leading the accountable care drive. greater manchester is also adopting this approach, and many others are starting to use the accountable care language.

accountable care has the potential to address many of the criticisms the most vociferous supporters of the nhs have made for many years. it goes a long way to replace competition with collaboration, and the nhs england chief executive, simon stevens, said it could mark the end of the infamous purchaser/provider split, which weighs down the health service with costly and often pointless bureaucracy.

locally led, integrated systems are essential if we are going to shift the nhs from a 1970s-style hospital service to one that provides a community-based health and wellbeing service. pooling budgets across the local area is not a ruse to disguise cuts. it is the most effective way to manage public money, irrespective of the level of funding.

the court case confuses the issue of how the nhs is organised with its funding and the role of the private sector. these are three different issues.

but the legal basis for accountable care is shaky. faced with the wreckage left by andrew lansley’s infamous 2012 reforms, nhs england introduced stps because trying to plan services through more than 200 clinical commissioning groups was never going to work.

 us lessons: what the nhs can learn from accountable care organisations
dr mark zezza
 read more
as demand climbed, funding flatlined in the aftermath of the 2008 crash and managing long-term conditions became the dominant challenge; it was imperative to move from competition to collaboration and set a long-term goal of population health management. that is where accountable care comes in.

stps and accountable care are operating under legislation meant for clinical commissioning groups – so collaborative systems typically serving 1.2 million people in which local government and all parts of the nhs have a say are underpinned by a legal framework for gp-managed competition overseeing populations of 250,000.

advertisement

this is such a precarious legal balancing act that the 2017 conservative manifesto promised to tidy up the legislation and regulations. but introducing an nhs bill now would be political harakiri for theresa may, and most health service staff would prefer legal ambiguity to yet another round of organisational upheaval that would inevitably follow legislation.

so the choice is to either continue to find legal bodges to allow the nhs to collaborate and plan or – if the high court challenge succeeds – to return to the lansley dream-turned-nightmare of full-blooded competition.

but although the thinking behind the legal challenge is muddled, that campaign and labour’s early day motion highlight the major problem: a profound change in the management and leadership of the nhs is being introduced without informed public and parliamentary discussion.

the new approach has many strengths, but introducing it under the radar only serves to feed anxieties and misconceptions about the objective. nhs england needs to get the discussion about accountable care out in the open.

the royle family actor has challenged the health secretary to a debate, james o'brien says they can use his studio.

jeremy hunt has found himself embroiled in an unusual twitter spat with ralf little and stephen hawking.

the comedy actor instigated the row with the health secretary by accusing him of knowingly lying on the andrew marr show over the state of nhs mental healthcare.

 
 
the andrew marr show
✔
@marrshow
what has actually happened on my watch is the biggest expansion of mental health provision in europe says @jeremy_hunt #marr

9:53 am - oct 29, 2017
 487 487 replies   127 127 retweets   158 158 likes
twitter ads info and privacy
little has since retracted the knowingly aspect of his allegation, admitting he made it in the heat of the moment, but he still insists the cabinet minister was presenting the public with incorrect statistics.

regardless, it was enough to ensnare hunt. he hit little back, citing three statistics alleged to support his case that britain has seen the biggest expansion of mental health provision in europe.

29 oct

ralf little
✔
@ralflittle
this is what it looks like when a man goes on tv and knowingly lies to the public. if i’m wrong @jeremy_hunt, sue me. i double dare you. https://twitter.com/marrshow/status/924574799736664066 …

 
jeremy hunt
✔
@jeremy_hunt
4,300 more employed by mental health trusts, 2,700 more employed in talking therapies, 1400 more people treated every day since 2010. isn’t it ur job 2 find a major european country that’s done better and faster rather than make assertions you can’t support? i double dare you

11:53 am - nov 8, 2017
 251 251 replies   18 18 retweets   30 30 likes
twitter ads info and privacy
what followed was a 40 tweet rebuttal thread, featuring statistics from the independent fact-checking charity full fact.

little told james he debunked two of hunt's claims and actually bolstered one, the health secretary having undersold his achievement.

it has been shared more than 20,000 times.

the actor, who has starred in the royle family and two pints of lager and a packet of crisps, also challenged hunt to a debate over the nhs' mental healthcare provision. he said the aim wouldn't be to score points, believing the nhs transcends party politics, but to have a transparent discussion.

little envisages a discussion with a team of fact checkers, as well as a few junior doctors in attendance to provide first hand evidence.

it might be why hunt has so far not taken up the offer, last month he had to retract a claim to parliament about increasing the number of mental health workers by 30,000 - 43 times the actual figure.

james even offered his studio to host the argumentative duo: it's hd ready, go viral all the time these days.

little feels hunt is ducking him with semantic arguments, he said: now what's happened is this. jeremy hunt is being chased on twitter: 'when are you going to debate ralf? when are you going to talk to ralf?'

what he's now doing is saying 'even though i said i'd meet with ralf, and his fact checkers and junior doctors, i only said i would do that if ralf could prove his claim that i knowingly lied.'

it's getting extremely semantic, extremely technical and it may even be legally sound.

this man, who is a clever politician and knows how to produce stats and facts, is obfuscating and avoiding a serious discussion about the nhs, mental health and the future of the nhs.

off the basis of a semantic argument, and a technicality, and i don't think that's reasonable. i think people deserve better, i think they should know.

the government has triggered a row with nhs staff by unveiling plans to overhaul their pay, including how much they receive for working antisocial shifts.

health unions have warned jeremy hunt that he is risking a repeat of the acrimonious junior doctors’ dispute by seeking to reduce the extra amounts staff get for weekend and overnight working.

the health secretary has also aroused anger by making it clear that he wants to change increments – extra cash staff receive that helps increase their take-home pay.

unions voiced their opposition after hunt disclosed his intentions in an interview with the health service journal, saying he wanted to change the way more than 1 million nhs personnel in england are paid by introducing a “more professional pay structure”.


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
staff affected by any shake-up include nurses, midwives, radiographers, therapists and dozens of other types of health professionals whose pay is set under a system called agenda for change.

the chancellor, philip hammond, said in the budget last week that the government would provide money to fund a pay rise next year above the 1% planned, but only in return for productivity improvements.

hunt prompted particular suspicion by telling the journal the contract imposed on england’s 55,000 junior doctors in 2016 after a bitter year-long dispute, which prompted eight walkouts by trainee medics, was “quite sensible”. he suggested it could be a basis for the revised contract he wants to see, with those who work more regularly at weekends receiving higher pay.

“across the public sector we have been wanting to move towards more professional pay structures. i think the biggest area that we have wanted to reform for a long time is the system of increments – in particular, payments that simply relate to time served rather than any measurable increase in professional abilities,” he said.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



ministers do not want to reduce the overall nhs pay bill, he insisted. “this isn’t a money-saving thing but about moving to modern professional pay structures,” hunt said.

but the royal college of nursing, which represents more than 300,000 nurses, accused him of being “ill-briefed on the increments system”.

“they are not automatic and recognise career progression, not simply time in a post,” a spokesperson said. the union welcomed the intention of maintaining antisocial hours payments, but warned hunt: “we will not support any reduction in terms and conditions.”

sara gorton, the head of health at the unison union, said: “if the government is expecting staff to pay for their own wage rise, it’ll be a very short set of talks indeed.”

jon skewes, a senior official at the royal college of midwives, said hunt had ignored advice unions gave him in a recent initial round of discussions about nhs pay “to explore more and talk less”.

“his intervention has not helped the prospect of a deal on pay in the nhs. last week’s budget was helpful on funding, but the secretary of state, by citing the junior doctors’ dispute, has blundered,” he said.

“[the rcm] will not be prepared to reduce the fair compensation that midwives and other staff in the nhs receive for providing a service that is there every day, every night, every weekend, every bank holiday, every christmas holiday.”

jonathan ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “alarm bells will be ringing loudly following this admission from jeremy hunt that he’s seeking to apply the junior doctors’ dispute as a template for pay talks across the nhs.

“his confrontational approach to that contract led to the first junior doctor strike ever and created a huge amount of worry and uncertainty for patients while the dispute was resolved.”

health unions want a pay rise of 3.9% next year, plus a further £800 to help make up for the erosion of their income over the past seven years of pay freezes and the 1% cap.

but the role of the public sector in driving forward life science innovation must not be ignored. as greg clark himself notes in the foreword to the sector deal, the nhs is a prized national asset and a key factor behind the strength of the uk life sciences sector.

the nhs can create huge benefits for patients in the uk. the royal marsden nhs foundation trust recently led the clinical trial of breast cancer drug palbociclib in collaboration with the institute of cancer research. this meant that many woman gained early access to the drug as an experimental therapy and are continuing to enjoy the health benefits today.

the nhs is easily the pharmaceutical industry’s biggest customer, but there is lots of evidence that it isn’t getting a good deal at the moment.


this means that for every woman benefiting from experimental treatment on the nhs there are others unable to get the drugs they need – with one british woman forced last year to launch a crowdfunding campaign to afford her breast cancer treatment.

and the cumulative effect of this is crippling the finances of our health service. total nhs spend on medicines increased from 11 per cent to 15 per cent of its annual budget between 2011 and 2016 – a rise that is larger than the current nhs deficit.

the other way that the public sector contributes to innovation in life sciences is through direct spend on r&d. yet this often means that the public ends up paying twice for drugs – first to develop them, and then to purchase them at a premium.

a recent report from stopaids and global justice now shows that uk taxpayers’ investment in medical research has led to the creation of medicines the nhs has not been able to afford. last year alone the nhs spent £1bn on medicines which relied upon significant uk government funding for their development.

the current system provides neither accountability nor transparency. we don’t know how much the nhs is paying for many medicines. we don’t know how much is spent on r&d, or what contribution the public has made. many aspects of clinical trial evidence are still too opaque.

these aren’t new problems – but now that the government intends to take a greater role in the development of new medicines, we need greater clarity regarding how the public will benefit.

we need to understand the true costs of r&d in order to have the evidence to determine a fair price for medicines. and when the uk taxpayer invests in the development of a new medicine we need to ensure that mechanisms exist to guarantee those medicines can be accessed by patients on the nhs and across the developing world.

when the public sector contributes, it gets a share of the rewards – this should be the principle at the heart of life sciences innovation.

labour has already pledged to raise r&d spending to 3 per cent of gdp as part of our industrial strategy. we want everyone to reap the benefits of new research, and as part of this we are developing proposals to ensure that the nhs doesn’t get a raw deal.

we’re building an innovation nation for the many, not the few.

new york is an american biweekly magazine concerned with life, culture, politics, and style generally, and with a particular emphasis on new york city. founded by milton glaser and clay felker in 1968 as a competitor to the new yorker, it was brasher and less polite, and established itself as a cradle of new journalism.[2] over time, it became more national in scope, publishing many noteworthy articles on american culture by writers such as tom wolfe, jimmy breslin, nora ephron, john heilemann, frank rich, and rebecca traister.
in its 21st-century incarnation under editor-in-chief adam moss, the nation's best and most-imitated city magazine is often not about the city—at least not in the overcrowded, traffic-clogged, five-boroughs sense, wrote then washington post media critic howard kurtz, as the magazine has increasingly published political and cultural stories of national significance.[3]
since its redesign and relaunch in 2004, the magazine has won more national magazine awards than any other publication, including the 2013 award for magazine of the year.[4] it was one of the first dual-audience lifestyle magazines, and its format and style have been emulated by some other american regional city publications.
in 2009, its paid and verified circulation was 408,622, with 95.8% of that coming from subscriptions. its websites—nymag.com, vulture.com, the cut, and grub street—receive visits from more than 14 million users per month

he 1936 movie beloved enemy is a fictionalised account of collins's life. unlike the real michael collins, the fictionalised dennis riordan (played by brian aherne) is shot, but recovers. hang up your brightest colours, a british documentary by kenneth griffith, was made for itv in 1973, but refused transmission. it was eventually screened by the bbc in wales in 1993 and across the united kingdom the following year.
in 1969, dominic behan wrote an episode of the uk television series play for today entitled 'michael collins'. the play dealt with collins' attempt to take the gun out of irish politics and took the perspective of the republican argument. at the time of writing the script, the troubles had just begun in northern ireland and the bbc were reluctant to broadcast the production. an appeal by the author to david attenborough (director of programming for the bbc at that time) resulted in the play eventually being broadcast; attenborough took the view that the imperatives of free speech could not be compromised in the cause of political expediency.
an irish documentary made by colm connolly for rté television in 1989 called the shadow of béal na bláth covered collins's death. a made-for-tv film, the treaty, was produced in 1991 and starred brendan gleeson as collins and ian bannen as david lloyd george. in 2007, rté produced a documentary entitled get collins, about the intelligence war which took place in dublin.[131][132]
collins was the subject of director neil jordan's 1996 film michael collins, with liam neeson in the title role. collins's great-grandnephew, aengus o'malley, played a student in a scene filmed in marsh's library.
in 2005 cork opera house commissioned a musical drama about collins.[133] michael collins by brian flynn had a successful run in 2009 at cork opera house and later in the olympia theatre in dublin.
infamous assassinations, a 2007 british documentary television series, devoted its eighth episode to the death of collins.

mcconnochie was born in armidale, new south wales and raised in adelaide, south australia. she has a phd in english literature from the university of sydney.
mcconnochie's novels have grappled with questions about celebrity and the possibilities open to women and women artists. the first, coldwater, transplants the brontë sisters to a penal colony off the coast of new south wales, using their plight to explore different approaches to art, life and love. it was shortlisted in the best first book (se asia and pacific region) category for the commonwealth writers prize,[citation needed] and was named by the washington post as one of the books of the year.[citation needed]
her second novel, the snow queen is set in adelaide and tells the story of a former russian ballerina stranded in post-war australia. it saw mcconnochie voted one of the best young australian novelists by the sydney morning herald.[citation needed]
her third novel, fivestar focuses on contemporary notions of celebrity, charting the rise and fall of an antipodean girl group reminiscent of the spice girls.
melissa, queen of evil, her first novel for children, won the 2006 aurealis award for best children's novel.

yorke attended newcastle university.[4] he joined the bbc in 1986, working initially in radio as a studio manager and then as a producer on bbc radio 5. [5]
in 1994, he moved to television, working as a script editor on eastenders before becoming storyline consultant on casualty. in 1999, after a brief period as producer on sunburn [6] starring michelle collins[6], he took on the executive producer role on eastenders.[7] during his time there, he was given the task of introducing the soap's fourth weekly episode and managed a win over long-running rival coronation street in a rare head-to-head showdown.[citation needed]
he axed the majority of the di marco family and helped introduce popular characters such as the slater family.[7] as what mal young described as two of eastenders most successful years, yorke was responsible for big ratings winners such as who shot phil?, ethel skinner's death, jim branning and dot cotton's marriage, abusive trevor morgan, and kat slater's revelation to her daughter zoe that she was her mother.[7] yorke was also responsible for kim medcalf being cast in the role of sam mitchell in january 2002, after danniella westbrook's drug addiction left her unsuitable for the role.[7]
in may 2002 he left the soap for a senior position under mal young in the bbc's in-house drama series team, but soon after he left to work for channel 4 as the head of drama in 2003. [8] there he commissioned successful shows such as shameless, sex traffic and the acclaimed omagh.[3]in 2005 it was announced he would return to the bbc, taking over mal young's position, as controller of bbc drama series, and, in addition, co-head of independent drama commissioning (i.e. programmes made for the bbc by independent production companies, rather than in-house).[8]
one of the reasons he returned was to set around reversing the fortunes of eastenders, which had been receiving low ratings in comparison to the past. the results were mixed. as controller of continuing drama series, he has been ultimately responsible for overseeing some of the most popular programmes on british television, including eastenders, casualty, holby city and doctors.

home and away fans have been waiting for kat's final scenes to air since august, after paparazzi pictures showed the cast filming the policewoman's funeral.

sadly, it looks like kat's days really are numbered now as a horror car crash airing on monday (december 18) will leave one character dead.


the tragedy follows a shock discovery for kat as she finally realises that her boyfriend robbo isn't the man he claims to be.

after kat confronts robbo with some very incriminating evidence, he takes terrifying action to avoid being arrested — kidnapping both her and tori morgan.

with kat's ex-boyfriend ash willing to go to desperate lengths to protect her and their unborn baby, a devastating sequence of events ultimately leads to a fatal accident where one resident will lose their life.

prior to the accident, kat does actually manage to escape from robbo's clutches – but unfortunately, tori isn't so lucky.

robbo considers leaving kat chapman in home and away
faced with an impossible dilemma, kat has to decide whether to report robbo to the police or try and rescue tori herself. 
but sadly, it looks like her final decision could have deadly consequences...

fans will have to tune in to find out what exactly happens, but one thing is for sure, summer bay will never be the same again.

jake ryan – who plays robbo – said to tv week: robbo is in too far now. he'll do whatever he possibly can – or he's going to go away [to jail] for a long time.

robbo would be devastated if he lost kat, he truly loves her. but his past is catching up with him.

home and away is now on its christmas break on channel 5 in the uk and will be off air for six weeks.

dexter is an american television crime drama mystery series that aired on showtime from october 1, 2006, to september 22, 2013.[1] set in miami, the series centers on dexter morgan (michael c. hall), a forensic technician specializing in blood spatter pattern analysis for the fictional miami metro police department, who leads a secret parallel life as a vigilante serial killer, hunting down murderers who have slipped through the cracks of the justice system. the show's first season was derived from the novel darkly dreaming dexter (2004), the first of the dexter series novels by jeff lindsay. it was adapted for television by screenwriter james manos, jr., who wrote the first episode. subsequent seasons evolved independently of lindsay's works.
in february 2008, reruns (edited down to a tv-14 rating) began to air on cbs in the wake of the shortage of original programming ensuing from the 2007–2008 writers guild of america strike, thus the reruns on cbs ended after one run of the first season. the series has enjoyed mostly positive reviews throughout its run and popularity, including four consecutive primetime emmy nominations for best drama series starting in season two. season four aired its season finale on december 13, 2009, to a record-breaking audience of 2.6 million viewers, making it the most-watched original series episode ever on showtime at that time.[2][3]
in april 2013, showtime announced that season eight would be the final season of dexter.[4] the season-eight premiere was the most watched dexter episode with more than 3 million viewers total for all airings that night.[5] the original broadcast of the series finale—shown at 9 pm on september 22, 2013—drew 2.8 million viewers, the largest overall audience in showtime's history.

councils are expected by the government to be largely self-financing. the government has steadily removed hypothecated funding for child social care, and for safeguarding children from abuse or neglect. historically, councils had to send business rate revenue to the government, while the government provided a large grant to councils based on need. under the cameron ministry, the business rate system was changed, so that councils keep 50% of the revenue; the central government grant was correspondingly reduced, and hypothecated streams merged into the general grant. the central grant has continued to fall, and shortly councils will retain 100% of business rate revenue. the grant has also fallen due to school funding being transferred directly to new academy schools, and housing benefit (paid via the council) being replaced by centrally paid universal credit.

the government has steadily cut funding for child social care. there is less money for children with disabilities, there is also less for children at risk of abuse or neglect. according to an inquiry into child social care in england nearly 90% of directors of children’s services say they now find fulfilling their legal duties to children in need of support increasingly hard. that involves keeping a child developing, healthy and safe. the national children’s bureau, which did the inquiry stated, “they’re being asked to do more with less. something has to give.” parents of sick children who need respite care now get less. some children are not getting protection against being abused or neglected. welfare cuts and increased poverty have increased the numbers of children in need while resources are falling. early intervention services have been cut because the government is not providing funding for this. families on the breadline can get less help feeding their children and evicted families can get less help being passed to homeless charities. maintained nurseries are being shut and youth mental health services are being cut. councils facing 20% cuts to funding must focus resources on children who are already suffering and there is less for preventative measures like spotting domestic violence in a family. when authorities eventually are involved the situation may need the child being taken into care. children taken into care have increased by 17%. this is considered inhuman and is also a false economy as the cost of keeping a teenager in care is far higher than the cost of mentoring the family so the youngster can stay with its family. due to this money spent on the average child in need has increased over the years.[54] there are fears children's social services will reach breaking point.”[55]

meanwhile, migration from the eu has drastically increaased the number of young families. the national children’s bureau, stated, that nearly 90% of directors of children's services in england say they now find fulfilling their legal obligations increasingly hard, and complained that “they’re being asked to do more with less. something has to give.”

many sure start centres have been closed. however, councils continue to provide their statutory obligations which were delivered at sure start centres, but do so elsewhere; the rental and maintenance costs of modern, well-located, spacious, buildings in which the sure start services are located is one of the main reason cited for choosing to closing such centres. preventative measures - like spotting domestic violence in a family - continue to be undertaken by health visitors, and there are an increasing number of them; health visitors now spend more time visiting, as they did historically, rather than get visited.

nevertheless, the loss of sure start centres is not without significant political criticism. alison michalska of the 'association of directors of children’s services' said, “we cannot go on as we are. local authorities know that a strong local early-intervention offer can reduce the need for more intrusive and costly interventions in the lives of children and families once problems have worsened and reached crisis point, yet councils have been left with no choice but to reduce these services in order to cope with rising demand. local authorities have worked hard to make savings, but we are running out of options.”[55]

children with life threatening and life limiting conditions sometimes need to access support at any time of day or night but cannot get that support. parents who are not expert clinicians have to deal with complex medical conditions themslves or call a&e.

uk social workers are currently registered with the health professions council which sets codes of conduct and practice. through the work of the munro review, the social work reform board and the piloting of social work practices, government aims to give greater autonomy to social workers. the reform board recommended the development of a professional college. the college of social work has been set up with the aim of improving and supporting social work by leading the development of the profession and representing it in discussions with organisations that regulate, train, work with, and are affected by social work. social care services are regulated by the care quality commission.

other social care organisations include the social care institute for excellence - an independent charity that identifies and transfers knowledge about good practice, and skills for care, the national lead agency for policy and strategy related to workforce development and the adult social care workforce.

the national skills academy for social care, launched in 2009, provides learning support and training practice for social care workers and employers in england with a specific remit on leadership development.

the association of directors of adult social services is the official voice of senior social care managers in england.

there are many other voluntary and independent organisations that exist to support the delivery of social care. these exist to support both the social care workforce and people who use services, and include user-led organisations.

421 care home businesses have gone out of business from 2010 to 2017. this covers nursing homes, homes for the elderly, residential care activities for learning disabilities, mental health, and substance abuse. frp advisory claims care homes were the only uk industry that suffered rising insolvencies over the time period. there is pressure on care homes because councils have contributed less while costs, notably staff overheads rose. martin green of care england said, “my view is that if you ask me who is to blame, it is the government. the government should be delivering a very clear vision for what social care is, they should be giving clear expectations to citizens about what they should expect from the system and what they should expect to pay for. none of that is happening.” chris stevens of frp said, “the fall in sterling against the euro will exacerbate pre-existing pressure on staffing costs in a sector reliant on overseas workers to fill frontline staff vacancies, and where margins have come under increasing pressure from the rise in the minimum wage, pension costs and cuts in local authority funding. the care home sector is beleaguered due to all local authorities facing overall double-digit budget cuts for this current financial year under way and beyond.

botulism is caused by botulinum toxin, a poison produced by the bacterium clostridium botulinum. the organism is common in the soil and aquatic sediments and can survive in these environments as a resistant spore.

the 3 main types of botulism are:

foodborne botulism
intestinal botulism (which is due to proliferation of the organism in the gut)
wound botulism
symptoms often begin with blurred or double vision and difficulty in swallowing and speaking. in foodborne botulism there may also be diarrhoea and vomiting. the disease can progress to a more generalised paralysis that includes the arms, legs, trunk and respiratory muscles.

most cases make a full recovery, but the recovery period can be many months.the disease can be fatal in 5 to 10% of cases.

stance on brexit and its impact on wales[edit]
during the brexit referendum campaign davies suggested wales would be better off financially outside the eu: “wales could be as much as half a billion pounds a year better off if the uk votes to leave the european union.[3] however, shortly after the referendum, where a majority of 52.4 percent in wales voted for leaving the eu, conservative welsh secretary alun cairns stated that wales could not expect a brexit administration to match the level of funding it received from brussels at present. (i. e. £1.9 billion for the period 2014 to 2020).[4]

in the run-up to the uk's invocation of article 50 of the treaty on european union, davis claimed that the welsh government should be denied the right to be part of brexit negotiations on devolved areas.[5]

despite his firm anti-eu stance, davis' family firm tj davies and sons had accepted a total of £96,808.89 in eu subsidies over the period october 16, 2013 to october 15, 2014 alone, including £70,930.63 allocated under the single area payment scheme, £24,099.86 agro-environmental payments and £1,728.40 from the first afforestation of agricultural land scheme.[6] commenting on the revelation of these figures britain stronger in europe spokesman james mcgrory said: taking money from europe while saying we should leave is hypocrisy of the first order.

although it is commonly believed that the australian government's initial involvement in sports was prompted by the country's poor performance at the 1976 montreal olympic games in which australia failed to win a gold medal, the government actually began initial investigations into its potential role in sports in 1973.[1] it was at this time that the government commissioned professor john bloomfield to prepare a sports plan for the country. his report, the role, scope and development of recreation in australia, was based on studies of sports institutes in europe and their success in developing elite athletes. bloomfield suggested to the government that it should establish a national institute of sport similar to those operating in european countries.[2]
following receipt of the report, the minister for tourism and recreation, frank stewart, appointed a study group (chaired by dr allan coles) to report on the feasibility of establishing a sports institute in australia. the coles report was released in 1975 and recommended the establishment of the institute.[1]
although the recommendation to establish the institute was made in 1975, it was not until 1981 that the institute was established. the delay in establishing the institute is commonly considered to be a combination of poor support for australian sport following the 1976 montreal olympics and the uneasiness between the australian olympic federation (now the australian olympic committee) and the government. this uneasiness was caused over the federation ignoring the government's request to boycott the 1980 moscow olympic games because of russia's invasion of afghanistan.
the bloomfield and coles reports, however, were not lost on bob ellicott, the minister for home affairs and environment. buoyed by the concept of a national sports institute during a trip to china and keen to bridge the gap between government and sport, in 1980 ellicott and his staff offered the coles report as a model plan for australia.[1] the plan would allow athletes to train and develop in australia rather than be forced overseas. ellicott's vision was well received and on australia day, 26 january 1981, the ais was officially opened by prime minister malcolm fraser. renowned swim coach, don talbot was appointed as the institute's first director.[1] with the institute established, the commonwealth government had begun its significant involvement in australian sport.[1]
the australian labor party in its 1983 election sport policy recommended the establishment of a sports commission to provide a more co-ordinated approach to sport.[3] in 1984, an interim committee report recommended its establishment. the australian sports commission was formally established by the australian sports commission act 1985. [1] in august 1987, the australian government formalised their decision to rationalise federal assistance to australian sport and the australian institute of sport merged with the australian sports commission, which was to be the agency responsible for general sports participation as well as high performance sport.

in humans the bladder is a hollow muscular organ situated at the base of the pelvis. urine collects in the bladder, fed from the two ureters that connect the bladder with the kidneys. urine leaves the bladder via the urethra, a single muscular tube which ends in an opening – the urinary meatus, where it exits the body.
anatomists divide the bladder into:.[3]
a broad fundus
a body
an apex
a neck
the apex (prev.vertex) is directed forward toward the upper part of the pubic symphysis, and from there the median umbilical ligament continues upward on the back of the anterior abdominal wall to the umbilicus. the peritoneum is carried by it from the apex on to the abdominal wall to form the middle umbilical fold.
the neck of the bladder is the area at the base of the trigone that surrounds the internal urethral orifice that leads to the urethra.[3] in males the neck of the urinary bladder is adjacent to the prostate gland.
the three openings, two ureteric orifices, and the internal urethral orifice mark the triangular area called the trigone of the bladder. these openings have mucosal flaps in front of them that act as valves in preventing the backflow of urine into the ureters,[4] known as vesicoureteral reflux. between the two ureteric openings is a raised area of tissue called the interureteric crest.[3] this makes the upper boundary of the trigone. the trigone is a smooth-muscle area that forms the floor of the bladder above the urethra.[5] it is an area of smooth tissue for the easy flow of urine into and from this part of the bladder - in contrast to the irregular surface formed by the rugae.
in men, the prostate gland lies outside the opening for the urethra. the middle lobe of the prostate causes an elevation in the mucous membrane behind the internal urethral orifice called the uvula of urinary bladder. the uvula can enlarge when the prostate becomes enlarged.
the bladder is situated below the peritoneal cavity near the pelvic floor and behind the pubic symphysis. in men, it lies in front of the rectum, separated by the recto-vesical pouch, and is supported by fibres of the levator ani and of the prostate gland. in women, it lies in front of the uterus, separated by the vesico-uterine pouch, and is supported by the elevator ani and the upper part of the vagina. the wall of the urinary bladder is normally 3–5 mm thick.[6] when well distended, the wall is normally less than 3 mm.[6]
the inner walls have a series of ridges, thick mucosal folds known as rugae that allow for the expansion of the bladder.
the latin phrase for urinary bladder is vesica urinaria, and the term vesical or prefix vesico - appear in connection with associated structures such as vesical veins. the modern latin word for bladder - cystis - appears in associated terms such as cystitis (inflammation of the bladder).

background[edit]
davies was educated at llanfair primary school, st john's preparatory school, porthcawl, and later boarded at wycliffe college, stroud. he is married to a qualified midwife and they have four children.[1] he is a partner in the family farming business based in st hilary near cowbridge in the vale of glamorgan. davies was a welsh delegate on the council of the national farmers union (nfu); vice president of the local young farmers club; and is a former chairman of creative communities, which seeks to develop structural community development. davies is also a life governor of the royal welsh agricultural society, and was the society’s oxford scholar in 2002. he is a former governor at llanfair primary school.[citation needed]

political career[edit]
joining the conservative party in 1997, davies fought cardiff west in the 2001 general election, and brecon and radnorshire in 2005. he has served as deputy chairman (political) for the conservative party in south wales central 2002–03, a region that comprises cardiff, rhondda cynon taff and the vale of glamorgan; and cardiff west conservative association 2004–05. in 2007, he was elected to the national assembly of wales. davies' political interests include education, health and rural affairs.

in the third assembly he was appointed shadow minister for transport in the national assembly for wales from 7 july 2007 to 16 june 2008, and shadow minister for education, lifelong learning and skills from 16 june 2008. he also sits on the assembly’s petitions committee, which reviews petitions from members of the public, as well as sitting on the subordinate legislation committee. in 2009 he became the shadow minister for health in the national assembly for wales. he has also won an award for being assembly member to watch in december 2008. he was elected as leader of the welsh conservative group on the 14 july 2011, having won 53.1 per cent of the vote.

the persian gulf is also home to many migratory and local birds. there is great variation in color, size, and type of the bird species that call the gulf home. one bird in particular, the kalbaensis subspecies of the collared kingfishers is at the brink of extinction due to real state development by cities such as dubai and countries such as oman.[62] estimates from 2006 showed that only three viable nesting sites were available for this ancient bird, one located 80 miles (129 km) from dubai, and two smaller sites in oman, all of which are in the process of becoming real estate developments.[62] such expansion would prove devastating and could cause this species to become extinct. unfortunately for the kingfisher, a u.n. plan to protect the mangroves as a biological reserve was blatantly ignored by the emirate of sharjah, which allowed the dredging of a channel that bisects the wetland and construction of an adjacent concrete walkway.[62] environmental watchdogs in arabia are few, and those that do advocate the wildlife are often silenced or ignored by developers of real estate, most of whom have royal family connections and huge energy profits to invest.[62] the end result has been sacrifice of a beautiful yet delicate ecology that has been in harmony for hundreds of years, for structures that are erected only a few years, yet will have a lasting detrimental effect.
almost no species in the persian gulf is spared from the real estate development of uae and oman, including the hawksbill turtle, greater flamingo, and booted warbler, mainly due to destruction of the mangrove habitats to make way for towers, hotels, and luxury resorts.[62][63] even dolphins that frequent the gulf in northern waters, around iran are at serious risk. recent statistics and observations show that dolphins are at danger of entrapment in purse seine fishing nets and exposure to chemical pollutants; perhaps the most alarming sign is the mass suicides committed by dolphins off iran's hormozgan province, which are not well understood, but are suspected to be linked with a deteriorating marine environment from water pollution from oil, sewage, and industrial run offs

the geography of wales means that there are areas where cross-border arrangements are necessary. the population of north wales is too small to support specialist units, so patients travel to liverpool and manchester. there are no large hospitals in mid wales at all. more than 31,000 welsh patients were treated in english hospitals in 2013/4.[15] in october 2014 jeremy hunt claimed that english hospitals close to the welsh border were under absolutely intolerable pressure and that people were fleeing the second class health service in wales.[16]

the entitlement to free prescription charges is based on the gp with which a patient is registered, so some patients who live in england benefit from them.
a clade (from ancient greek: κλάδος, klados, branch) is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants, and represents a single branch on the tree of life.[1]
the common ancestor may be an individual, a population, a species (extinct or extant), and so on right up to a kingdom. clades are nested, one in another, as each branch in turn splits into smaller branches. these splits reflect evolutionary history as populations diverged and evolved independently. clades are termed monophyletic (greek: one clan) groups.
over the last few decades, the cladistic approach has revolutionized biological classification and revealed surprising evolutionary relationships among organisms.[2] increasingly, taxonomists try to avoid naming taxa that are not clades; that is, taxa that are not monophyletic.[citation needed] some of the most interesting revelations on the relationships between organisms that the molecular biology arm of cladistics has revealed are that fungi are closer relatives to animals than they are to plants, archaea are now considered different from bacteria, and multicellular organisms may have evolved from archaea
university college london hospitals nhs foundation trust complained in june 2015 that commissioners outside england use a burdensome prior approval process, where a funding agreement is needed before each stage of treatment. at the end of 2014–15 the trust was owed more than £2.3m for treating patients from outside england. a survey by the health service journal suggested there was £21m of outstanding debt relating to patients from the devolved nations treated in the last three years, against total invoicing of £315m by english nhs trusts.

work for us
our success is measured by the quality of our patients' experience. when you join us, you will play a vital role in moving our organisation forward and maintaining our reputation for excellence in patient care.

you can apply for a job with us through our website or nhs jobs.

why choose us
we aim to be one of the employers of choice in berkshire and are committed to compassionate care for all our patients. our values underpin all we do.

we've recently been rated as ‘good’ by cqc for the range of mental health and community services we provide. working in partnership with patients and their families is really important to us as this helps us to provide the best care in the right place.

throughout your career with us, you'll be supported in your continuing professional learning and development.

staff benefits
we strive to build a great working culture, where people are valued. we listen to our staff and encourage them to give and receive feedback. we also offer a number of benefits to help everyone maintain a good work-life balance, including:

wexham park hospital is located approximately two miles north of slough town centre on the corner of wexham street and church lane/wexham park lane.

our car park is often very busy and we ask that wherever possible you travel to your appointment or visit the hospital by public transport to ease pressure, avoid congestion and any delay to your appointment.
improving access with group consultations for diabetes in slough
case study summary
group consultations replace routine one-to-one appointments for diabetic patients. this results in gp or a practice nurse practitioner being able to see up to 12 patients in 40‐60 minutes. this potentially doubles productivity and access to routine care and follow up appointments.

 

as part of the gp access fund scheme in slough, a number of practices, working with the experience led care programme (elc) have been supporting five practices in slough to prepare and run group consultations. several are now well on their way to applying group consultations as part of routine general practice.

group consultations ‐ also called shared medical appointments, group medical appointments or group appointments ‐ are medical appointments delivered by a clinician in a supportive peer group setting. they are not an addition to routine one-to-one appointments. they replace routine one to one appointments. this means that the gp or practice nurse practitioner can see up to 12 patients in 40‐60 minutes. this potentially doubles productivity and access to routine care and follow up appointments.

impact
after the first four months, the five practices reported positive changes, and a further seven local practices have expressed an interest in joining the project. gps have enjoyed working in this way, and there has been very positive feedback from patients. both report that they are managing to discuss important issues they don’t normally include in consultations. the group consultation approach is proving applicable to patients from s asian backgrounds as well as white british people, and early feedback indicates it may actually work best for people with the most complex needs and those who are poorly compliant with monitoring traditionally.

tips for adoption
gps often have a number of concerns about the feasibility and suitability of this approach. consider booking a few trial sessions with expert facilitation before seeking commitment to shift to this model in the longer term.

my career in general practice opened up a world of possibilities
case study summary
prof val wass’s career spanned over four decades. she looks back at her experiences and outlines some of the issues facing general practice today.

 

at the start of her medical career, val wass never imagined that she would amass such a range of experiences or such a lengthy cv. medical school 50 years ago was a hugely different era; the specialty a doctor trained in was a career for life. “you imagined being in a job for the rest of your career,” she says. there weren’t many women practising medicine, and there was very little exposure to primary care.

her proudest achievements include her appointment as head of the school of medicine at keele university and becoming the first woman elected to the medical schools council executive. she has worked in more than 25 countries, chaired the royal college of general practitioners international committee for six years, and for 10 years led a college project to develop accreditation of family medicine doctors across south asia.

she has had the model “portfolio career”, where doctors choose to move away from the traditional one job for life, but instead have a portfolio of employments, inside and outside of clinical practice.

she started her career in medical research in paediatric renal medicine before later moving to adult care. it was during this time she realised she wanted to be a holistic doctor. “looking after chronic patients, you begin to realise that it’s not just about their illness – they’ve other concerns; whether they can have children, their ability to work, their family,” she says.

it was this desire to care holistically for patients and their families that brought wass into general practice, a specialty she would practice in for the rest of her career. she loved being a gp, and says she heard many interesting stories from patients. “you’re holding all these little confidences and you feel so privileged that people are sharing their lives with you.”

looking back, wass says she didn’t expect that a career in general practice would also “open up a whole world”. the flexibility it offered allowed her to seize new opportunities, including a move to london as a senior lecturer in primary care, where she worked in a medical school and helped raise the standard of inner city general practice. a move to manchester followed, where wass helped to shape the curriculum and assessment of medical students with a focus on training more in the community, among other roles.

“being a gp really helped me transfer into these roles,” says wass. “you were able to put the patient narrative much more into everything you did. you can put the gp experience into exams for example, so that doctors see the patient in their own environment.”

despite these opportunities, wass believes general practice is still looked down upon, posing its biggest challenge. “it’s really hard to get primary care valued by other doctors … but the truth is that with co-morbidity, an ageing population, the complexities of a modern day population, general practice really will need the brightest doctors.”

to help improve this, wass has led on work at keele university to help students and academics realise just how important general practice is, including introducing gp role models and encouraging medical students to balance their practice with academic research. however, she believes that more needs to be done to raise primary care’s status and is working with health education england to report on how general practice is perceived as a career in medical schools.

she argues that as primary care is changing, what doctors want from their future has changed. “the thing that is putting them off from general practice is the thought of doing the same thing for their entire life – you can’t tell young people that they need permanence. they’re looking at working for a long time and they want flexibility to follow their own career path, and often to change course along the way.”

this, she believes, is where general practice is letting itself down – for many, particularly grassroots gps, general practice is a career for life. there should be more flexibility both in being able to develop skills in other specialties and allowing doctors to enter general practice when they are more mature and feel ready to deal with the challenges of primary care.

“you don’t have to go straight into it. as a gp, anything could happen; it can be very challenging and requires a special personality, often an individual type of personality,” she says.

“not everyone can do it. my experience of research and other training really prepared me for general practice. there’s nothing wrong with doing something first, to get your confidence up and build up your maturity – we should be embracing that.”

doctors in training should also be encouraged to take up the opportunities that general practice offers because it is flexible and allows doctors to build their own portfolio career: “i love general practice, really enjoyed it, but a portfolio career gave me flexibility, to be always able to do different things and keep the balance right.”

“if i had one piece of advice to foundation doctors, it would be to think about your whole career, one that allows you to seize opportunities and follow your own interests. think big.”

new models of care – livewell south west
case study summary
a new model service designed, to improve quality of care for patients in nursing and residential homes. the service will deliver a weekly clinical pharmacist visit to each home along with a joint gp/pharmacist visit every four weeks.

 

evidence shows that care home residents are among the most vulnerable people in our society with complex needs that often include multiple long term conditions and advanced frailty which cannot be met by primary care within the gms contract to the level required to ensure good quality of care. care home residents are unable to attend their local pharmacy for treatment of minor ailments, or attend their primary care practice, resulting in frequent visits to the care home from gps, with frequent and multiple prescribing interventions. they also have a higher than average use of emergency and urgent care services, including the south western ambulance service (swast) and devon doctors.

patients in nursing and residential homes are currently underserved within the current general practice contract.  gp care to residents in nursing and residential homes is often limited to visits on request, with little continuity of care.  each care home usually has residents registered with a variety of gp practices leading to fragmented inconsistent care. in addition, polypharmacy is often one of the main causes of emergency admissions. adverse drug events account for approximately 6.5% of all hospital admissions, but more in older people, leading to increased hospital stay and significant morbidity and mortality.

livewell proposed a change that challenged the current model, which recognised the vulnerability and heightened medical risk for this frail group of patients.

solution
a new model service has been designed, to improve quality of care for patients in nursing and residential homes. the service will deliver a weekly clinical pharmacist visit to each home along with a joint gp/pharmacist visit every four weeks.

the scope of the service includes the joint working innovation for care homes to address frailty and ensure effective prescribing. the model is for a multi-disciplinary integrated healthcare team to care for patients in nursing and residential homes in geographically-focused areas. it covers six homes with a combined bed total of 281..

the service provides proactive and responsive care, better supporting this vulnerable group in the following areas: promoting self-management where appropriate, optimising primary and secondary prevention interventions to avoid acute exacerbations where there is evidence to support this, and ensuring residents are treated symptomatically to maintain wellbeing. along with undertaking detailed medication reviews which will help to reduce admissions and aid the seamless transfer of care between care settings.

through planned and focused attendance at each care home by the ‘team’, a systematic approach to identifying residents who are at end of life will be developed, leading to appropriate support and care being implemented at the earliest opportunity. in addition, improved collaboration with older people’s mental health services will be encouraged to better support residents with dementia and other mental health conditions.

outcomes
the project is in an early stage of service delivery but  many benefits have already been realised by having the service in place, including:

improved medicines management
decrease in number of medications being prescribed
decrease in medication spend
improving transfer of medicines between primary and secondary care
undertaking timely follow up of patients
decrease in gp visits to care homes
increase in education and learning within the home from careworkers
early indication (after three months) has shown significant improvements in prescribing practice, and an increase in the prevalence of comprehensive care plans and treatment escalation plans. patients, families and care home staff are all highly engaged and are highly satisfied with the service. we hope that in time we can develop a sense of responsibility and ownership that will result in reduced falls and unplanned admissions.

tips for adoption
working at scale has made this service possible. partnership working and sharing resources and skills is essential for success. this has been evident between livewell south west and beacon medical group across a number of projects.

dr adam morris, medical director, livewell southwest said: “we know that care home residents are some of our most vulnerable patients and are particularly susceptible to side effects from complex prescribing regimes. we also know that care home medical cover can be reactive rather than proactive and that many residents are admitted to acute trusts due to medication problems. this proactive multi-professional approach helps minimise avoidable harm for these patients.

building resilience in general practice – st austell healthcare
case study summary
the closure of one general practice put significant pressureon the remaining three practices in the area. rather than struggling individually, the three practices merged to form one new sustainable, multi skilled primary care service.

 

in august 2014, the largest practice in st austell (polkyth) handed back their general medical services (gms) contract, leaving 8,000 patients without a gp. polkyth’s failure put significant pressure on the remaining three practices in the town.  for twelve months, those practices joined together to run polkyth using an alternative provider medical services (apms) contract and then, following  public consultation, the three practices  merged and all the polkyth patients were transferred to the new practice.

primary care services have now been redesigned for the 32,000 patients with an emphasis on upskilling a broad multidisciplinary team (mdt), collaborative working with community (nhs and non-nhs) partners, social care, the local acute trust and an out-of-hours (ooh) provider. they have improved access by running an acute care hub from the former polkyth site (open 8am-8pm monday to friday).

the merger has saved primary care in st austell from probable collapse. st austell healthcare now have a sustainable clinical and financial model that meets the demands on current primary care and is dynamic enough to embrace future change.

this innovative approach and ability to implement change has been recognised by the national association of primary care (napc) and they are currently one of 15 national test sites for the primary care home pilots.

st austell healthcare has changed the way it works through:

recruitment and upskilling of the clinical and non-clinical team
separating urgent and planned care
collaborative working with health and social care providers
a pioneering social prescribing scheme
staff wellbeing reviews
high-level financial modelling and advice from a dedicated finance consultant
streamlining back office functioning
implementation of systmone it clinical system across all five sites
new ophthalmology secondary care service for macular degeneration and glaucoma.
the offer of flexible working and portfolio careers for salaried gps hashelped with the demands of work and family life. st austell healthcare has managed to recruit successfully but their model is based on high patient to whole time equivalent (wte) numbers (approx. 2,900 patients/wte), they see investing in their mdt as the key to sustainable general practice in st austell.

the last 18 months in st austell have seen huge changes in general practice. st austell healthcare feel that the merger has allowed a redesign of their entire business and patient-care strategies.

dr stewart smith, gp partner said: “since the merger we have found recruitment easier, we can command higher standards from our management team, collaborative working has improved, we have developed new income streams and crucially our gps are happier and more positive about the future. we have regular visitors from all over the south west to look at our model and to discuss collaborative working. we are very happy to share learning with practices.

improving access with physiotherapy
broadening the workforce – using direct access to physiotherapy as an alternative to seeing a gp
case study summary
a musculoskeletal (msk) practitioner (senior physiotherapist), based in a practice, supplies brief interventions of assessment, advice and exercise.  a pilot, focusing on gp workload and therapy, looked at whether the role of the physiotherapist could help reduce the pressure on gp appointments and release time. alongside this
self-referral option which is face to face, patients can self-refer themselves for assessment and advice to a physiotherapy telephone service.

the idea
as an alternative to seeing their gp, patients were given the option to book themselves an assessment directly with the msk practitioner. this could take place either face to face or over the phone.  during the assessment the practitioner, where appropriate, was able to give:

advice and exercises along with a self-management plan – patients were advised to return to the practice if they felt no improvements
referral for further physiotherapy
referral to an appropriate service e.g. podiatry.
after emis (egton medical information systems) coding and searches proved unreliable, all gp consultations were investigated over a one week period for msk problems that could have been dealt with by the physiotherapist.  this led to the trial of a new self-referral system available to patients via telephone advice.

impact
the greatest impact has been patients being able to self-refer via telephone.

the baseline figure of msk cases seen by a gp as first point of contact was 14.5 per cent, on re-evaluation this reduced to over 50 per cent, the figure now stands at 6 per cent.  this suggests patients are choosing to self-refer through the telephone system rather than seeing their gp.  more recent data for early 2017, shows that only 2.75 per cent of gp workload each week is now msk, where self-referral over the phone has been successfully implemented.
referrals from the practice into the telephone assessment and advice service have doubled.
over 30% of patients calling in to the service are now dealt with over the telephone, resulting in no increase in waiting times for usual care physiotherapy.
the 20 minute, face to face, msk practitioner sessions are proving popular.  uptake has reached capacity in the practice with 66 per cent of patients dealt with in this single brief physiotherapy intervention.
early indications show that a physiotherapist can be a cost effective member to the practice workforce.  similar pilots in other practices have shown cost savings to local health economies in terms of prescribing and placing patients on the correct pathway of care, investigations and secondary care referral.  feedback from patients has also been positive.

“a sensible way forward to save gp time.”

“a lot better than seeing a doctor for my problem as it ‘cuts out the middleman’, it saves time for everyone and lets someone who really needs to see a doctor have the appointment.”

“a specialised service which could ease the workload on gps who are not able to be an expert in everything and will help patients.”

implementation tips
change your practice’s outgoing telephone message so patients are aware they can have quick and easy access to physiotherapy. this works best if one of the practice’s gps records it.  do as much marketing as possible. this is a new choice for patients and it will take time for the message to filter through, as it did with the role of advanced nurse practitioners.  continually promote the work with patient groups.cancer treatment fund for wales?
by tony beddow

share
click to share on facebook (opens in new window)click to share on twitter (opens in new window)click to share on pinterest (opens in new window)click to share on google+ (opens in new window)click to share on linkedin (opens in new window)
print
 
the national assembly for wales debated the cancer treatment fund on wednesday.

the welsh labour government is clear that it will not be replacing existing evidence-based system with a cancer drugs fund like that in england, which its own chair has admitted provides funding for cancer drugs which have ‘no impact on survival’ and ‘uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not’.

all medicines approved by the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) and the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) are made routinely available for patients in wales. medicines not approved by nice or awmsg are generally found to be too costly for the benefit obtained – they are not cost-effective.
we believe all cancer patients should be able to access the best possible treatments but for this to happen within the nhs budget, prices set by the pharmaceutical industry for new, life-extending drugs must come down. it is impossible to put a price on life but it is not impossible to put a fair price on drugs.
cancer patients in wales are more likely to receive evidence based, cost-effective medicines than in england and the welsh government is working hard to ensure that there is more consistency across the whole of wales.
wales invests in clinically-proven medicines for all by putting money into medicines which have been approved by the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) and the national institute for health and care excellence (nice).
all new medicines considered clinically and cost-effective by nice or awmsg are already routinely provided to patients by the nhs in wales. where drugs are not approved, mechanisms are in place to ensure individual patients have access when clinical exceptionality is demonstrated.
the all-wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) has carried out 119 appraisals of new medicines since april 2011, of which 105 have been recommended for use in wales.
as of october 2014, awmsg had appraised and recommended 19 new cancer medicines for use in nhs wales. these 19 cancer medicines cover 23 clinical indications and all are routinely available to eligible patients. only nine of these medicines are available in england via the cancer drugs fund.
a recent study by the university of bristol published in the british journal of cancer, about whether the english cancer drugs fund led to faster uptake of cost-effective drugs, concluded wales had a faster uptake of the drugs most recently launched and subsequently recommended by nice.
the research also found medicines considered not cost-effective by nice were more frequently prescribed in england than in wales and the cancer drugs fund in england did not expedite access to new cost-effective cancer medicines when compared to wales.
in september, wales became the first country in the uk to make the new pancreatic cancer drug abraxane available to all eligible patients in wales on the nhs – the only part of the uk.
the king’s fund has questioned the cancer drugs fund, as has the ‘british medical journal’, which questions the cancer drugs fund in terms of what it delivers.
the ‘british medical journal’, for example has pointed out that the cancer drugs fund is paying pharmaceutical companies over the odds for drugs that, in the past, would have cost the nhs a lot less.
the medical journal, the lancet is also on record as stating that “the cdf is a product of political opportunism and intellectual incoherence, which undermines the evidence-based approach to the allocation of nhs resources.” it also described the fund as “intellectually indefensible” because funds for other conditions such as dementia and multiple sclerosis had not been set up.
the welsh labour government’s policy on cancer drugs is based on clinical evidence – not free market ideology.
the welsh government believes that it is important that there is a system in place for ensuring that patients have access to drugs where their circumstances dictate that, which is why in wales we have the individual patient funding requests process, in order to do that.
however, simply throwing money at pharmaceutical companies, which is what the cancer drugs fund does, is not the way forward for wales.
welsh government action on cancer
spending

the nhs in wales is spending more than ever on cancer care, thanks to the welsh labour government.
spending on cancer has risen significantly since 2007 when the welsh government allocated £314.8m to cancer.
the latest figures – from the annual nhs expenditure programme budgets – show that spending on cancer care by the welsh nhs reached a record high at £360.9m in 2012-13.
spending per head of population on cancer in wales was £117.41 in 2012-13. this is £10 more per head than in england – spending per head on cancer was £107.21 in england in 2012-13
cancer targets
the welsh government has not set a formal target for first cancer outpatient appointments; we expect all health boards to see patients within 31 or 62 days depending on the particular pathway they are on (see below).
the health minister wrote to all health boards in wales in summer 2013 reminding them that having a first outpatient appointment in 14 days (10 working days) is best clinical practice and they should benchmark themselves against this internally.
performance against this standard is discussed at the regular quality and delivery meetings but it is not a published waiting time target in wales.
the current cancer waiting times targets in wales are:

everyone referred by their gp via the urgent suspected cancer route is put on a 62-day pathway, during which all investigations (tests) are carried out. this is the same in wales and in england.
the target in wales is for 95% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days from gp referral. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 87.4% of patients were seen within that time.
the target in england is for 85% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available), 84.1% of patients were seen within this target.
there is also a 31-day cancer pathway in england and wales.
for patients newly diagnosed with cancer not via the urgent route the target in wales is that 98% should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 98.1% of patients were treated within 31 days.
in england, figures for the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available) show 97.8% of people treated began first definitive treatment within 31 days of receiving their diagnosis.

the spleen (from greek σπλήν—splḗn[1]) is an organ found in virtually all vertebrates. similar in structure to a large lymph node, it acts primarily as a blood filter.
the spleen plays important roles in regard to red blood cells (also referred to as erythrocytes) and the immune system.[2] it removes old red blood cells and holds a reserve of blood, which can be valuable in case of hemorrhagic shock, and also recycles iron. as a part of the mononuclear phagocyte system, it metabolizes hemoglobin removed from senescent red blood cells (erythrocytes). the globin portion of hemoglobin is degraded to its constitutive amino acids, and the heme portion is metabolized to bilirubin, which is removed in the liver.[3]
the spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. a study published in 2009 using mice found that the red pulp of the spleen forms a reservoir that contains over half of the body's monocytes.[4] these monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (such as the heart after myocardial infarction), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing.[4][5][6] the spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections.[7]
in humans the spleen is brownish in color and is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.

the small intestine develops from the midgut of the primitive gut tube.[14] by the fifth week of embryological life, the ileum begins to grow longer at a very fast rate, forming a u-shaped fold called the primary intestinal loop. the loop grows so fast in length that it outgrows the abdomen and protrudes through the umbilicus. by week 10, the loop retracts back into the abdomen. between weeks six and ten the small intestine rotates anticlockwise, as viewed from the front of the embryo. it rotates a further 180 degrees after it has moved back into the abdomen. this process creates the twisted shape of the large intestine

the small intestine receives a blood supply from the coeliac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery. these are both branches of the aorta. the duodenum receives blood from the coeliac trunk via the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and from the superior mesenteric artery via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. these two arteries both have anterior and posterior branches that meet in the midline and anastomose. the jejunum and ileum receive blood from the superior mesenteric artery.[13] branches of the superior mesenteric artery form a series of arches within the mesentery known as arterial arcades, which may be several layers deep. straight blood vessels known as vasa recta travel from the arcades closest to the ileum and jejunum to the organs themselves.

staffing[edit]
in the year ending at march 2017, there were 1.187 million staff in the nhs, 1.9% more than in march 2016.[41]

in the same year, there were 691,000 nurses registered in the uk, down 1,783 from the previous year. however, this is the first time nursing numbers have fallen since 2008 and there are 13,000 more nurses in the nhs than in 2010. poor working conditions, staffing levels and workload also dissatisfaction with the quality of patient care were given as reasons as were poor pay and benefits. saffron cordery of nhs providers said, these figures provide further evidence of the severe workforce problems nhs trusts face. burseries to nursing students are to be stopped forcing nurses to pay for their training, it is expected this will also be a discouragement.[42] commentators are increasingly arguing that staffing shortages are endangering the sustinability of the nhs. there are too few health workers, nurses and midwives, doctors are also in short supply. hospitals, community trusts and mental health trusts all face shortages.[43] some general practitioners are losing sleep because they worry work pressure may have lead them to miss something that puts a patient at risk.[44] in hospitals junior doctors are sometimes forced to do work beyond what they have been trained for. this is stressful for doctors and puts patients at risk. overworked consultants do not have the time to carry out proper supervision of less qualified doctors.[45]

effect of brexit[edit]
the plan to exit the european union will affect physicians from eu countries, about 11% of the physician workforce.[46] many of these physicians feel unwelcome and are considering leaving the uk if brexit happens, as they have doubts that they and their families can live in the country.[46] a survey suggests 60% are considering leaving.[47] record numbers of eu nationals (17,197 eu staff working in the nhs which include nurses and doctors) left last year. the figures, put together by nhs digital, lead to calls to reassure european workers over their future in the uk.[48] eu nurses registering to work in the uk are down 96% since the brexit vote aggravating shortages of nurses. janet davies of the royal college of nursing, said, “we rely on the contributions of eu staff and this drop in numbers could have severe consequences for patients and their families. our nursing workforce is in a state of crisis. across our health service, from a&e to elderly care, this puts patients at serious risk.

proprietary operating system[edit]
in 2001 the nhs entered into a licensing deal with microsoft, ignoring the advice of some of its own it specialists that had recommended investing in linux instead.[54] concerns about the vulnerability of nhs computer systems to cyber-attack have been expressed since at least 2016.[55] nhs computer systems have been subject to cyber attacks of which one in may 2017 was notable.[56] the may 2017 attack lead to the cancellation of at least 6912 appointments including operations, 139 suspected cancer patients had urgent referrals cancelled. the number of gp appointments cancelled, the number of ambulances diverted from a&e departments unable to treat some patients, the number of delays in receiving information like test results are unknown. north korea is strongly suspected of starting the attack. the attack happened on a friday in may. a cyberattack on a monday in winter would be even more damaging.[57] nhs computers have been vulnerable because a minority still use or used windows xp, an outdated system that originated in 2001, and one which microsoft stopped supporting with security patches. complacency among nhs staff and among government departments that pay for computer security are blamed. unless systems are upgraded, more cyber attacks are feared.[58] dr david wrigley of the british medical association said, “it’s been known about for years, that the software isn’t up to date across the nhs, so it’s not unpredictable that this situation should have arisen. but it’s disappointing that funding hasn’t been given to upgrade the system. it needs urgent action by politicians.”

performance[edit]
in 2014 the nuffield trust and the health foundation produced a report comparing the performance of the nhs in the four countries of the uk since devolution in 1999. they included data for the north east of england as an area more similar to the devolved areas than the rest of england. they found that there was little evidence that any one country was moving ahead of the others consistently across the available indicators of performance. there had been improvements in all four countries in life expectancy and in rates of mortality amenable to health care. despite the hotly contested policy differences between the four countries there was little evidence, where there was comparable data, of any significant differences in outcomes. the authors also complained about the increasingly limited set of comparable data on the four health systems of the uk.[18]

rising social costs have led to a significant increase in the time between patients being declared medically fit and finding social care placements in many cases.[19]

political criticism[edit]
the performance of the nhs in wales has been used by uk prime minister david cameron as an illustration of what he views as mismanagement by welsh labour. criticism is chiefly about waiting times for diagnostics and surgery, the absence of a cancer drugs fund and the fact that very few private providers are used to keep waiting lists down. the welsh border was described by david cameron as 'a line between life and death'.[20] andrew r. t. davies claimed that the labour-run welsh nhs is fast becoming one of the conservatives' key electoral assets ahead of next year's general election. he launched a survey of attitudes to the nhs in 2014 which concluded that the welsh held the nhs dear to their hearts, though almost two-thirds of respondents felt the performance of the welsh nhs had declined in recent years. the survey found a wide range of problems caused by a lack of resources. staff complained that whistleblowers risked professional suicide and some patients said complaints or concerns were not taken seriously by nhs managers[21]

nhs wales is governed by what its critics describe as a post-war structure: with seven separate regional health boards, each dominated by labour supporters – the taffia.[22]

defenders of the nhs in wales point out that it operates on £1,900 per person compared with the north east of england which is similar to wales in terms of need and gets £2,100 per person. while some waiting lists such as orthopaedic surgery may be longer in wales some other aspects of the service such as cancer care are better in wales. english figures are not collected and reported on the same basis as welsh ones.[23] 90% patients who used welsh hospitals and gps in 2013 were satisfied or very satisfied with their care. in contrast across britain as a whole only 60% said they were satisfied with the nhs.[24]

in october 2014 the daily mail claimed that around half of welsh cancer sufferers must wait six weeks or more for many scans and tests yet in england ... the comparable figure is less than 6%. the welsh government responded by pointing out that targets for timely treatment of cancer were the same in wales as in england, for example that 98% not on the urgent pathway should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. on the latest figures the performance in wales was actually slightly better than in england. wales has a specific waiting time target for diagnostic tests, different from england – the maximum wait for access to specified diagnostic tests is 8 weeks. in august 2014 24,107 patients were waiting more than 8 weeks for diagnostic tests in wales; 70% receive their tests within the target time.[25] it defending the decision not to set up a cancer drugs fund as in england, on the ground that the fund's own chair has admitted it provides funding for cancer drugs which have 'no impact on survival' and 'uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not' and pointed out that the all-wales medicines strategy group got new drugs such as sativex approved for use in wales more quickly than the national institute for health and care excellence in england.[26]

in february 2016 the organisation for economic co-operation and development published a review which concluded that performance of the nhs in wales was little different from that in the rest of the uk. they described performance across the uk as fairly mediocre saying that great policies were not being translated into great practices. they suggested that gps should be more involved in health boards and that resources should be shifted out of hospitals.[27]

complaints[edit]
it was reported that there had been 10,395 recorded staff complaints about staffing levels between 2012 and 2015. the highest number of complaints (3,609) related to cardiff and vale university health board. the government response was that since 1999, the total number of staff working in the welsh nhs had increased by a third. in 2015 there were 2,000 gps working in the nhs in wales, the highest number ever and an increase of 11% since 2003. the number of nursing, midwifery and health visiting staff increased from 28,157 in 2010 to 28,300 in 2014.[

the systems are 98.8% funded from general taxation and national insurance contributions, plus small amounts from patient charges for some services.[23][24] about 10% of gdp is spent on health and most is spent in the public sector.[25] the money to pay for the nhs comes directly from taxation. the 2008/9 budget roughly equates to a contribution of £1,980 per person in the uk.[26]

when the nhs was launched in 1948 it had a budget of £437 million (roughly £9 billion at today’s prices).[27] in 2008/9 it received over 10 times that amount (more than £100 billion). in 1955/6 health spending was 11.2% of the public services budget. in 2015/6 it was 29.7%.[28] this equates to an average rise in spending over the full 60-year period of about 4% a year once inflation has been taken into account. under the blair government investment levels increased to around 6% a year on average. since 2010 spending growth has been constrained to just over 1% a year.[28]

some 60% of the nhs budget is used to pay staff. a further 20% pays for drugs and other supplies, with the remaining 20% split between buildings, equipment, training costs, medical equipment, catering and cleaning. nearly 80% of the total budget is distributed by local trusts in line with the particular health priorities in their areas.[29] since 2010, there has been a cap of 1% on pay rises for staff continuing in the same role. unions representing doctors, dentists, nurses and other health professionals have called on the government to end the cap on health service pay, claiming the cap is damaging the health service and damaging patient care.[30] the pay rise is likely to be below the level of inflation and to mean a real-terms pay cut.[31] the house of commons library did research showing that real-terms nhs funding per head will fall in 2018-19, and stay the same for two years afterwards.

criticism[edit]
research indicates that society does not support the prioritisation of cancer drugs over other treatments.[11] the financial times attacked the fund in december 2014 as a populist gesture that gives the impression of benefiting patients, but in fact rewards poor quality drugs while benefiting a handful of pharmaceutical companies at the expense of the taxpayer and the full range of nhs patients, complaining that it undermined the national institute for health and care excellence.[12] james le fanu writing in the daily telegraph said this mechanism for diverting taxpayers’ money to enhance, to little or no purpose, the profits of big pharma might be more aptly named “the drug company fund”.[13] in february 2015 york university researchers reported that the fund represented particularly poor value, diverting money from other patient services and that for every healthy year gained by this fund, five qalys could be lost across the nhs.[14]

in december 2014 andy burnham announced that a labour government would replace the fund with a cancer treatment fund which would pay not only for innovative cancer drugs, but also for surgery and radiotherapy. it could mean increased access to advanced forms of radiotherapy such as intensity modulated radiotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiotherapy.[15]

in july 2015 the independent cancer taskforce established by nhs england proposed reform of the fund, which the taskforce said was “no longer sustainable or desirable… in its current form”.[16]

professor karl claxton, a health economist at the university of york, says that the fund should be scrapped because the money would be better used on 21,000 patients with heart, lung and gastro-intestinal diseases who are denied cost effective evidence based treatment,[17] arguing that the principal beneficiary of the fund is 'big pharma'.[18]

in september 2015 the national audit office reported that no data had been collected on the 74,000 patients whose treatment had been funded, at a cost of nearly £1 billion, so it was impossible to discover whether the treatment had been effective.[19]

the public accounts committee published a report on the fund in february 2016 which concluded that there was no evidence the fund was benefiting patients, extending lives or a good use of taxpayers' money.[20]

prof richard sullivan, of king's college london and dr ajay aggarwal of the london school of hygiene & tropical medicine published a study in the annals of oncology in april 2017. he concluded that the initiative as initially established was a huge waste of money and a major policy error. the researchers studied the 47 treatments that were being funded by january 2015, of which only 18% met internationally recognised criteria for being deemed clinically beneficial. for those drugs where there was some evidence of benefit, the average was an extra 3.2 months of survival. the majority of patients were exposed to unpleasant side effects for no benefit. £1.27 billion was spent on the fund during the period studied.[21] no usable data was collected on what happened to patients whose treatment was funded - such as measuring how long they lived, their quality of life or side-effects. there was no consideration of the relative merits of surgery and radiotherapy.[22]

the national health service (nhs) is the collective name as well as the name used individually for each of the four public health services in the united kingdom: the national health service in england, nhs scotland, nhs wales, and health and social care in northern ireland. they were established together in 1948 as one of the major social reforms following the second world war. the founding principles were being comprehensive, universal and free at the point of delivery.[1] today, each provides a comprehensive range of health services which are free for people ordinarily resident in the united kingdom apart from dental treatment and optical care.[2] (the english nhs also requires patients to pay prescription charges though there is a range of exemptions from these charges.)

each of the uk's health service systems operates independently, and is politically accountable to the relevant government: the scottish government, welsh government, the northern ireland executive, and the uk government which is responsible for england's nhs. nhs wales was originally part of the same structure as england until powers over the nhs in wales were firstly transferred to the secretary of state for wales in 1969 and thereafter, in 1999, to the welsh assembly as part of welsh devolution. however, some functions might be routinely performed by one health service on behalf of another. for example, northern ireland has no high-security psychiatric hospitals and thus depends on using hospitals in great britain, routinely at carstairs hospital in scotland for male patients and rampton secure hospital in england for female patients.[3] similarly, patients in north wales use specialist facilities in manchester and liverpool which are much closer than facilities in cardiff, and more routine services at the countess of chester hospital. there have been issues about cross-border payments.[4]

growing numbers of patients taken to hospital by ambulance are having to wait an hour or more before they are handed over to a&e staff for treatment, nhs england figures show.

in the week to last sunday, 17 december, one in seven such patients faced a delay of at least 30 minutes in the back of an ambulance or an area of the hospital where the crew look after them, up from one in eight the week before.

hospitals are finding it impossible to stick to tough rules brought in for this winter by nhs england and nhs improvement requiring that no patient should have to wait more than 15 minutes.


alarm over sharp rise in ambulance patient deaths in england
 read more
in a further sign of the extra pressure the nhs is under this winter, the number of times a&e units had to temporarily divert patients elsewhere because they could not cope with the demand for care rose from 25 the previous week to 30.

gateshead hospital trust had to do so nine times, including four times on 13 december alone, while the main trust providing acute care in worcestershire did it eight times.

the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “patients should be under no illusions: there has been an appalling winter downturn across our nhs over the past month. despite the heroic efforts of our brilliant nhs staff, it’s unacceptable that so many patients have been stuck in the back of ambulances for such a long time.”

in the week to 17 december, 14,323 patients in england (15% of the total) waited at least half an hour before they were handed over for a&e care, up from 11,852 the previous week, a 21% increase.

of those patients, 10,899 were unable to access a&e care for between 30 and 60 minutes, up from 9,515 the week before, and 3,424 waited at least an hour, up from 2,337.

a total of 95,392 patients arrived by ambulance at hospital emergency departments in england last week.

some trusts fared significantly worse than the england average: at least one in three patients in 11 trusts waited 30 minutes or more before being admitted to a&e.

according to official nhs figures 93% of ambulance patients arriving at lancashire teaching hospitals nhs foundation trust and half of ambulance patients attending united lincolnshire hospitals nhs trust had to wait 30 minutes or more.


ashworth said that during the first month of winter a total of 46,993 patients had had to wait in the back of ambulances for more than 30 minutes, and 9,775 had had to wait for longer than an hour. “there has been an 86% rise in the number of delays for over one hour in just the past two weeks as the cold snap has hit,” he said.

the chief nursing officer for england’s summit 2018 offers an opportunity for the senior nursing, midwifery and care leadership community to explore how to deal with current challenges and use their collective leadership and ambition to shape the future of our health and care system.

the summit will include international speakers and leaders from across the health and care system in england and will take place on 7 and 8 march 2018 at the acc liverpool.

the general and acute bed occupancy rate in hospitals rose from 94.6% to 95%, far above the 85% level experts consider the maximum to maintain safe patient care.

slightly fewer beds – 1,071 a day on average – were closed last week as a result of norovirus, the winter vomiting bug. but nhs england said the number of incidents was growing.

for example, norovirus forced northumbria healthcare in the north-east to close and seal seven wards at four of its hospitals. “every year we are affected by norovirus but this is the worst it’s been for a few years. all our main sites have people with the bug on them in some shape or form,” said dr jeremy rushmer, the trust’s medical director.

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb said: “these figures show the nhs is under huge strain as we enter the christmas period. hospitals are suffering from a severe lack of beds and a&es are already under intolerable pressure.

“no patient should ever have to wait in pain in the back of an ambulance outside a&e, yet this is now becoming a routine occurrence across the country.”
nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp)
most people would be shocked to know that around 22,000 people with diabetes die early every year. type 2 diabetes is a leading cause of preventable sight loss in people of working age and is a major contributor to kidney failure, heart attack, and stroke.

there are currently 3.4 million people with type 2 diabetes in england with around 200,000 new diagnoses every year. while type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented and is not linked to lifestyle, type 2 diabetes is largely preventable through lifestyle changes.

one in six of all people in hospital have diabetes – while diabetes is often not the reason for admission, they often need a longer stay in hospital, are more likely to be re admitted and their risk of dying is higher.

as well as the human cost, type 2 diabetes treatment accounts for just under nine per cent of the annual nhs budget. this is around £8.8 billion a year.

there are currently five million people in england at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. if these trends persist, one in three people will be obese by 2034 and one in 10 will develop type 2 diabetes.

there is strong international evidence which demonstrates how behavioural interventions, which support people to maintain a healthy weight and be more active, can significantly reduce the risk of developing the condition.

the healthier you: nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp) identifies those at high risk and refers them onto a behaviour change programme.

the nhs dpp is a joint commitment from nhs england, public health england and diabetes uk.

we are currently piloting a digital stream of the nhs diabetes prevention programme.
nhs england is an executive non-departmental public body (ndpb) of the department of health.

nhs england oversees the budget, planning, delivery and day-to-day operation of the commissioning side of the nhs in england as set out in the health and social care act 2012.[1] it holds the contracts for gps and nhs dentists. the secretary of state publishes, annually, a document known as the mandate which specifies the objectives which the board should seek to achieve. national health service (mandate requirements) regulations are published each year to give legal force to the mandate.

nhs england employs around 6,500 staff in 50 sites around england. most of its staff previously worked for the decommissioned primary care trusts and strategic health authorities.
nhs england is the operating name of the nhs commissioning board and, before that, the nhs commissioning board authority.[2] it was set up as a special health authority of the nhs in october 2011 as the forerunner to becoming an ndpb on 1 april 2013.[3] it was renamed nhs england on 26 march 2013.[4] its legal name remains the nhs commissioning board.

sir david nicholson who became chief executive at the establishment of the board retired at the end of march 2014 and was replaced by simon stevens. one of stevens' first acts was to announce a restructure of its 27 area teams in response to a requirement to reduce running costs which would reduce staffing by around 500.[5] the 27 teams outside london were reduced to 12 in 2015.[6]

system management[edit]
it produced a planning document the five year forward view in october 2014 which envisaged development of new models to suit local needs.

nhs england in conjunction with the other central regulators established what is called a success regime in south and mid essex, north cumbria and north east and western devon in june 2015. it is intended to tackle “deep rooted and systemic issues that previous interventions have not tackled across [a] whole health and care economy”.[7]

in 2016 it organised the geographical division of england into 44 sustainability and transformation plan areas with populations between 300,000 and 3 million. these areas were locally agreed between nhs trusts, local authorities and clinical commissioning groups. a leader was appointed for each area, who is to be responsible for the implementation of the plans which are to be agreed by the component organisations. they will be working across organisational boundaries to help build a consensus for transformation and the practical steps to deliver it.[8]

in april 2017 it introduced a capped expenditure process applied to nhs commissioners and providers in the 13 areas across england with the largest budget deficits. it is intended to reduce their spending by around £500 million, and health leaders were told to ‘think the unthinkable’.[9]

operational pressures escalation levels framework[edit]
in october 2016 it introduced a new system for the management of operational difficulties in english hospitals, replacing the rather poorly defined system of red and black alerts which were locally defined. there are 4 opel levels. level 1 is a state of normality. level 4 is a major crisis requiring external intervention either regionally or nationally.[10] this is intended, among other things, to enable comparisons of trends over time and between different areas. [11]

primary care[edit]
applications by gps to reduce their catchment area are dealt with by nhs england. requests to reduce the number of patients eligible to join a practice and in some cases also to deregister existing patients, have risen with 26 made between april and october 2014 compared to 30 for the whole of 2013/14. only 15 have been approved.[12]

in november 2014 mr justice popplewell declared that nhs england “has acted unlawfully by reason of its failure to make arrangements for the involvement of patients in primary care commissioning decisions as required by the national health service act 2006”. the case involved the decision to scrap minimum practice income guarantee. richard stein, a partner at leigh day, said the declaration could mean that patients would have to be involved in discussions on changes to the gp contract.[13]

nhs england awarded a 4-year contract to capita to become sole provider of administrative services including payment administration, management of medical records, and eligibility lists for practitioners for gps, opticians and dentists across the uk in june 2015.[14]

see also general medical services

information technology[edit]
the organisation was reported to be developing a strategy to support the use of personal health records in june 2015. this, it is hoped, could achieve up to £3.4 billion in annual efficiency savings by 2020.[15] in april 2016 it published an index of digital maturity, where each of the 239 nhs trusts assessed its own readiness, capabilities and enabling infrastructure.[16][17]

specialist commissioning[edit]
specialised services are those provided in relatively few hospitals, accessed by comparatively small numbers of patients but with catchment populations of usually more than one million. these services tend to be located in specialised hospital trusts that can recruit a team of staff with the appropriate expertise. nhs england is responsible for commissioning £15.6 billion of specialised services and for dealing with individual funding requests in respect of the specialist services it commissions.

it was criticised for delays in deciding on a policy for the prescription of everolimus in the treatment of tuberous sclerosis. twenty doctors addressed a letter to the board in support of the charity tuberous sclerosis association saying around 32 patients with critical need, whose doctors believe everolimus treatment is their best or only option, have no hope of access to funding. most have been waiting many months. approximately half of these patients are at imminent risk of a catastrophic event (renal bleed or kidney failure) with a high risk of preventable death.[18] in may 2015 it was reported that luke henry and stephanie rudwick, the parents of a child suffering from tuberous sclerosis were trying to sell their home in brighton to raise the money to pay for treatment for their daughter bethany who has tumours on her brain, kidneys and liver and suffers from up to fifty epileptic fits a day.[19]

it authorises and pays for treatment of narcolepsy with sodium oxybate by means of individual funding requests on the basis of exceptional circumstances. in may 2016 the high court ordered nhs england to provide funding to treat a teenager with severe narcolepsy. the judge criticised their “thoroughly bad decision” and “absurd” policy discriminating against the girl when hundreds of other nhs patients already receive the drug. the department of health is also paying for the treatment of people whose narcolepsy was caused by the swine flu vaccine pandemrix in 2009-10 by means of private prescriptions outside the national health service.[20]

arbitration[edit]
the organisation's responsibilities include arbitration in disputes between clinical commissioning groups and nhs trusts.[21]
clinical commissioning groups (ccgs) are nhs organisations set up by the health and social care act 2012 to organise the delivery of nhs services in england.[1] 211 groups were established in 2013 and there was resistance to any proposals for mergers between groups although gateshead ccg, newcastle north & east ccg and newcastle west ccg merged in 1 april 2015. during 2016 it appeared that further mergers would be permitted and an official procedure was published in november 2016 by nhs england.[2] during 2017 further proposals for merger appeared. 83 ccgs were sharing chief officers in march 2017, which may be a precursor to merger. if all those led to merger there would be 174 groups.[3]

to a certain extent they replace primary care trusts (pcts), though some of the staff and responsibilities moved to local authority public health teams when pcts ceased to exist in april 2013. services directly provided by pcts were reorganised through the transforming community services programme.
ccgs are clinically led groups that include all of the gp groups in their geographical area. the aim of this is to give gps and other clinicians the power to influence commissioning decisions for their patients.[1][4]

ccgs are overseen by nhs england (including its regional offices and area teams). these structures manage primary care commissioning, including holding the nhs contracts for gp practices nhs.[5]

each ccg has a constitution and is run by its governing body. each has to have an accountable officer responsible for the ccg’s duties, functions, finance and governance. most ccgs initially appointed former pct managers to these posts.[6] only a quarter of accountable officers were gps in october 2014, but 80% of ccg chairs were gps.[7] only half of gp practices said they felt involved in ccg decision making processes.[8] the health and social care act 2012 provides that the areas specified in the constitutions of clinical commissioning groups together cover the whole of england, and do not coincide or overlap. each ccg is responsible for persons who are provided with primary medical services by a member of the group, and persons who usually reside in the group’s area and are not provided with primary medical services by a member of any clinical commissioning group.

e-reward, an online pay research service, analysed the pay of more than 2,500 managers at the 211 ccgs in england in 2015. they reported that 56% of 225 top executives – chief officers and chief finance officers – were paying themselves more than the salary range recommended by nhs england of £95,000 to £125,000 a year.[9]

unite the union surveyed the 3,392 ccg board members in 2015 and reported that 513 were directors of private healthcare companies: 140 owned such businesses and 105 carried out external work for them. more than 400 ccg board members were shareholders in such companies.[10] the kings fund and the nuffield trust ran a survey of gps in six areas of england in 2016 and found that more than 70% were at least “somewhat” engaged with the work of their ccg, though only 20% of those without a formal role in their ccg said they could influence the work of their ccg if they chose to.[11]

lakeside healthcare applied to move from corby ccg (where it had 2/3 of the registered population) to nene ccg in 2015, but nene refused to accept it.[12]

during 2017 mergers between ccgs began, having previously been forbidden.[13] gps in staffordshire submitted a vote of no confidence in their local ccgs in protest against a proposed merger. the merger between liverpool, south sefton and southport and formby ccgs was stopped while and investigation into liverpool ccg's governance and management of conflicts of interest was carried out, leading to the resignation of several of its leaders. there were also similar investigations in hackney and crawley.[14]

in october 2017, it was announced that brighton and hove clinical commissioning group was to merge with brighton and hove city council, to form a health and social care integration board: the merge, commencing in april 2018 and culminating in a full merger a year later, is intended to prevent the duplication of work and streamline provision of health and social care within the city.
a national health service trust is an organisation within the english nhs generally serving either a geographical area or a specialised function (such as an ambulance service). in any particular location there may be several trusts involved in the different aspects of healthcare for a resident.
nhs trusts were established under the national health service and community care act 1990 and were set up in five waves. each one was established by a statutory instrument.

the trusts are not trusts in the legal sense but are in effect public sector corporations. each trust is headed by a board consisting of executive and non-executive directors, and is chaired by a non-executive director. there were about 2,200 non-executives across 470 organisations in the nhs in england in 2015.[1] non-executive directors are recruited by open advertisement. all trusts (foundation trusts and those which have yet to reach foundation trust status) are regulated by nhs improvement. board members are, from november 2014, subject to a fit and proper person test.

all trust boards are required to have an audit committee consisting only of non-executive directors, on which the chair may not sit. this committee is entrusted not only with supervision of financial audit, but of systems of corporate governance within the trust. hospital board members have a duty to act on signals of poor performance on quality and safety data, and yet many of the papers presented to them have been found to be lacking good data visualisations.[2]

future development[edit]
in september 2015 jeremy hunt was reported as saying “i think we do have too many trusts as independent organisations in a context where mergers between trusts and the establishment of chains of hospitals were being discussed.[3] subsequently simon stevens made it clear that he did not expect the remaining nhs trusts to become foundation trusts, saying we are frankly kidding ourselves if we think the non-fts are going to pass the kinds of criteria that have been set by monitor.[4]

the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.


the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.

shifting the balance of power
contents next page previous page
background
2.21 the nhs plan sets out a vision for service designed around the patient - a service of high quality and national standards which is fast, convenient and uses modern methods to provide care where and when it is needed. such a service will not only be designed around patients but also be responsive to them, offer them choices and involve them in decision making and planning.

the secretary of state announced on 25 april 2001 a programme to shift the balance of power within the nhs away from central government and towards front line staff and their patients. under the arrangements set out in secretary of state's shifting the balance of power speech local clinicians and managers, working in primary care trusts and nhs trusts, were to be empowered to ensure that local services reflect the needs of the local community. 'shifting the balance of power' is about putting patients and staff absolutely at the heart of the nhs by empowering them and changing the culture and structure of the nhs to reflect this.

preparing for change
in july 2001 the department published shifting the balance of power within the nhs - securing delivery, (2.29) detailing the proposed changes and inviting responses in a discussion period. over 400 responses were received from the service as well as the major national representative bodies. there was general support for the direction of change, although there were many queries about the detailed implementation of the proposals. shifting the balance of power - the next steps(2.30) was published in january 2002. this document addressed the major issues raised in the discussion period. it set out the framework and principles for the changes but - inline with its own philosophy - left the practical arrangements, the how, when and where of working arrangements and service delivery - to be decided locally. consultation on the boundaries of the new health authorities took place in autumn 2001 and the new boundaries were subsequently confirmed along with the chairs and chief executives (designate). franchise plans were then developed by the chief executives outlining how they intended to run their organisations, based on a specification set by the department.

structural changes
much progress has been made in developing and implementing the structural changes:

england's 95 previous health authorities were abolished on 1 april 2002.
much of the planning and commissioning work previously carried out by these health authorities has been passed to just over 300 primary care trusts, which by 2004 will be controlling over 75 per cent of nhs funding.
28 new health authorities (set to become strategic health authorities in october 2002, subject to legislation) serving populations of around 1.5 million were also established on 1 april, responsible for developing strategy and performance managing pcts and nhs trusts, so as to secure delivery and consistency of approach. they will in effect manage the nhs locally on behalf of the department.
the department of health has also been re-focusing to reflect the new structure. four new directorates of health and social care became operational on 1 april with responsibility for working directly with the nhs and performance managing the new health authorities while the regional offices are to be abolished.
as a result of these changes, £100 million will be freed up by 2004 to spend on childcare facilities for nhs staff as an aid to recruitment and retention.

delivering the nhs plan
plans for devolving power to locally run services - within a framework of clear national standards - were strengthened in the department's delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform (2.31) document, published in april 2002. this document builds on the structural and cultural changes of shifting the balance of power.

further information
further information is available on the dh web-site at:

department of health 'shifting the balance of power: securing delivery'
department of health 'shifting the balance of power: the next steps'
department of health 'delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform.

planet health cymru launched at walking and cycling conference
thursday, 4 november 2010
planet health cymru, a new web resource for all those working in the built and natural environment and health, was launched at the third annual walking and cycling conference.
 
the resource encourages collaborative working and provides information and signposting to the planning sector; allowing them to incorporate health considerations in their decision making on future developments.
 
it was developed by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales, managed by public health wales.
 
planet health cymru (planning for environment, transport and health) www.planethealthcymru.org seeks to provide a ‘one-stop-shop’ for people working in health, the green and urban environments, design and architecture, regeneration, sustainability, transport and community development amongst others.
 
the welsh assembly government aims to encourage physical activity and give due prominence to walking and cycling through development and infrastructure planning and decision making. the new website is one means of supporting this aim, set out in planning policy wales and creating an active wales.
 
the work has been led by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales working with a wide-ranging advisory board which includes representatives from the welsh assembly government, royal town planners institute, welsh local government association, design commission wales, institute of civil engineers, centre for regeneration excellence in wales, the transport consortia and countryside council for wales.
 
su mably, consultant in public health for public health wales who oversaw the development of the project commented, “we have the opportunity to learn from the lessons of the past, for example the tower blocks built in the 1950s and 1960s, when not much consideration was given to how these homes would impact on residents’ mental, social and physical health.
 
“planet health cymru is an excellent tool which will allow all those working in planning, regeneration, transport, design and health to consider the health of the local people when developing new projects.”
 
the minister for environment, sustainability and housing, jane davidson said: “today’s walking and cycling conference is all about encouraging people in wales to make healthy and sustainable travel choices.
 
“if we are to succeed in this ambition we must make walking and cycling as safe and easy as possible. the planning of our villages, towns and cities is key to this and i am delighted that the planet cymru web resource will help to ensure that health considerations are fully factored into the planning process.”
 
dr tony jewell, chief medical officer for wales, added: “it is important to give people information to enable them to make informed choices in an effort to improve their health and well-being. it is crucial to make health choices, easy choices. how we plan and build our towns and cities is key to making easier choices – making it easier for people to walk or cycle to the shops or to school, rather than use the car, or to have local spaces to walk or relax.

public health wales is the national public health agency in wales and exists to protect and improve health and wellbeing and reduce health inequalities for people in wales. we are part of the nhs and report to the cabinet secretary for health, well-being and sport in the welsh government.

with a strong board, 1,700 staff and a budget of £106 million, the organisation employs the majority of the specialist public health resource in wales. 

we provide advice, expertise and specialist services to welsh government (working across departments), the seven health boards, two nhs trusts, 22 local authorities, other agencies and to the population of wales.
 
we provide the public health knowledge, scientific expertise and intelligence to lead transformational change and to drive a focus on ensuring that we deliver tangible improvements in health and wellbeing outcomes and reduce health inequalities in wales. 

health and local government are among the devolved areas in wales and therefore, working nationally and locally, public health wales has access to both policy levers and local delivery systems by working closely with our partners. 

each of the seven health boards in wales employs a director of public health who is supported by the critical mass of expertise employed by public health wales at the local and community level and who, under an honorary contract, manages locally based public health wales staff. 

public health wales, health boards and local authorities work closely together to promote public health in their areas and jointly identify and set the local strategic agenda in partnership with communities, housing, education, police, fire and rescue and the voluntary sector. 
 
 
 cartrefu, which means to reside in welsh, is a four year programme run by gwanwyn which aims to improve access to quality arts experiences for older people in residential care.

between 2015 and 2017 age cymru recruited 16 professional artists in four different fields: performing arts, visual arts, words and music. these artists each delivered eight 8-week residencies across the length and breadth of wales, introducing a mix of established art forms and new activities residents may not have had the chance to experience before.

cartrefu has been a huge success and over the past two years our artists have delivered over 1,000 art workshops in care homes around wales. age cymru was able to offer these workshops entirely for free due to the generous support from the arts council of wales and the baring foundation.

in 2017 cartrefu re-launched with a brand new team of 12 artists, this time working in care homes for 12 weeks. with our second team of cartrefu artists we want to push the boundaries of what has been attempted in care homes before, and hope to inspire bold and striking new art work from the residents our artists work with.

we hope that cartrefu will foster a greater appreciation of the arts among care home staff as they work with our artists. we want care home staff to gain more confidence and acquire new skills, sharing and practicing them in their daily work with residents.

cartrefu has designed an activity pack for care homes, based on the work our first cartrefu team of artists developed in care homes. the activity pack feature 20 simple but effective activities for care home staff to run with residents and are free to all care homes in wales.

to obtain your free pack, please get in touch with cartrefu project coordinator reg noyes

evaluation report
we recently launched our evalution report in the senedd on tuesday 10 october 2017. 

the evaluation, undertaken by dr katherine algar skaife from the dementia research centre wales at bangor university, found that cartrefu increased the well-being of residents, improved their social skills, and even helped some of them regain long lost abilities like using a knife and fork. it also found that the project had a positive impact on the care home staff with many reporting improved attitudes to residents, especially those with dementia. one carer said “it made me realise residents are more capable than one might give them credit for.”

the evaluation also found that the project developed a group of artists who are now better equipped to work with vulnerable older people in care settings and that the lives of the residents are more like to be reflected in future work undertaken by the artists. you can download a copy of the evaluation report below.

if you'd like more information about our cartrefu project, please contact us or visit the gwanwyn website.

 


funding of clinical commissioning groups[edit]
nhs england allocates funding (of £69.5 billion in 2016/7) to ccgs in accordance with a funding formula. until 2016 progress towards the amount indicated by the formula from the historical allocation was very slow, and ccgs which were above their allocation did not actually suffer a reduction. from april 2016 however ccgs with more than 10% above their fair share will receive flat cash - an effective reduction. this will also ensure than no ccg is more than 5% below its target allocation in 2016/7
an nhs england spokesman said: the recent cold snap has seen hospitals put under pressure, but they are generally coping. additional services and beds will be coming online over the next few weeks funded by the [£337m] winter budget cash released by the government. staff are working hard to ensure ambulance handovers are as smooth as possible.”
taken together, the four national health services in 2015-16 employed around 1.6 million people with a combined budget of £136.7 billion.[5] in 2014 the total health sector workforce across the uk was 2,165,043. this broke down into 1,789,586 in england, 198,368 in scotland, 110,292 in wales and 66,797 in northern ireland.


cancer treatment fund for wales?
by tony beddow

share
click to share on facebook (opens in new window)click to share on twitter (opens in new window)click to share on pinterest (opens in new window)click to share on google+ (opens in new window)click to share on linkedin (opens in new window)
print
 
the national assembly for wales debated the cancer treatment fund on wednesday.

the welsh labour government is clear that it will not be replacing existing evidence-based system with a cancer drugs fund like that in england, which its own chair has admitted provides funding for cancer drugs which have ‘no impact on survival’ and ‘uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not’.

all medicines approved by the national institute for health and care excellence (nice) and the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) are made routinely available for patients in wales. medicines not approved by nice or awmsg are generally found to be too costly for the benefit obtained – they are not cost-effective.
we believe all cancer patients should be able to access the best possible treatments but for this to happen within the nhs budget, prices set by the pharmaceutical industry for new, life-extending drugs must come down. it is impossible to put a price on life but it is not impossible to put a fair price on drugs.
cancer patients in wales are more likely to receive evidence based, cost-effective medicines than in england and the welsh government is working hard to ensure that there is more consistency across the whole of wales.
wales invests in clinically-proven medicines for all by putting money into medicines which have been approved by the all wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) and the national institute for health and care excellence (nice).
all new medicines considered clinically and cost-effective by nice or awmsg are already routinely provided to patients by the nhs in wales. where drugs are not approved, mechanisms are in place to ensure individual patients have access when clinical exceptionality is demonstrated.
the all-wales medicines strategy group (awmsg) has carried out 119 appraisals of new medicines since april 2011, of which 105 have been recommended for use in wales.
as of october 2014, awmsg had appraised and recommended 19 new cancer medicines for use in nhs wales. these 19 cancer medicines cover 23 clinical indications and all are routinely available to eligible patients. only nine of these medicines are available in england via the cancer drugs fund.
a recent study by the university of bristol published in the british journal of cancer, about whether the english cancer drugs fund led to faster uptake of cost-effective drugs, concluded wales had a faster uptake of the drugs most recently launched and subsequently recommended by nice.
the research also found medicines considered not cost-effective by nice were more frequently prescribed in england than in wales and the cancer drugs fund in england did not expedite access to new cost-effective cancer medicines when compared to wales.
in september, wales became the first country in the uk to make the new pancreatic cancer drug abraxane available to all eligible patients in wales on the nhs – the only part of the uk.
the king’s fund has questioned the cancer drugs fund, as has the ‘british medical journal’, which questions the cancer drugs fund in terms of what it delivers.
the ‘british medical journal’, for example has pointed out that the cancer drugs fund is paying pharmaceutical companies over the odds for drugs that, in the past, would have cost the nhs a lot less.
the medical journal, the lancet is also on record as stating that “the cdf is a product of political opportunism and intellectual incoherence, which undermines the evidence-based approach to the allocation of nhs resources.” it also described the fund as “intellectually indefensible” because funds for other conditions such as dementia and multiple sclerosis had not been set up.
the welsh labour government’s policy on cancer drugs is based on clinical evidence – not free market ideology.
the welsh government believes that it is important that there is a system in place for ensuring that patients have access to drugs where their circumstances dictate that, which is why in wales we have the individual patient funding requests process, in order to do that.
however, simply throwing money at pharmaceutical companies, which is what the cancer drugs fund does, is not the way forward for wales.
welsh government action on cancer
spending

the nhs in wales is spending more than ever on cancer care, thanks to the welsh labour government.
spending on cancer has risen significantly since 2007 when the welsh government allocated £314.8m to cancer.
the latest figures – from the annual nhs expenditure programme budgets – show that spending on cancer care by the welsh nhs reached a record high at £360.9m in 2012-13.
spending per head of population on cancer in wales was £117.41 in 2012-13. this is £10 more per head than in england – spending per head on cancer was £107.21 in england in 2012-13
cancer targets
the welsh government has not set a formal target for first cancer outpatient appointments; we expect all health boards to see patients within 31 or 62 days depending on the particular pathway they are on (see below).
the health minister wrote to all health boards in wales in summer 2013 reminding them that having a first outpatient appointment in 14 days (10 working days) is best clinical practice and they should benchmark themselves against this internally.
performance against this standard is discussed at the regular quality and delivery meetings but it is not a published waiting time target in wales.
the current cancer waiting times targets in wales are:

everyone referred by their gp via the urgent suspected cancer route is put on a 62-day pathway, during which all investigations (tests) are carried out. this is the same in wales and in england.
the target in wales is for 95% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days from gp referral. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 87.4% of patients were seen within that time.
the target in england is for 85% of patients newly diagnosed with cancer via the urgent suspected cancer route to start definitive treatment within 62 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available), 84.1% of patients were seen within this target.
there is also a 31-day cancer pathway in england and wales.
for patients newly diagnosed with cancer not via the urgent route the target in wales is that 98% should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. in the first quarter of 2014-15 (april to june) 98.1% of patients were treated within 31 days.
in england, figures for the first quarter of 2014-15 (the latest figures available) show 97.8% of people treated began first definitive treatment within 31 days of receiving their diagnosis.

the spleen (from greek σπλήν—splḗn[1]) is an organ found in virtually all vertebrates. similar in structure to a large lymph node, it acts primarily as a blood filter.
the spleen plays important roles in regard to red blood cells (also referred to as erythrocytes) and the immune system.[2] it removes old red blood cells and holds a reserve of blood, which can be valuable in case of hemorrhagic shock, and also recycles iron. as a part of the mononuclear phagocyte system, it metabolizes hemoglobin removed from senescent red blood cells (erythrocytes). the globin portion of hemoglobin is degraded to its constitutive amino acids, and the heme portion is metabolized to bilirubin, which is removed in the liver.[3]
the spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. a study published in 2009 using mice found that the red pulp of the spleen forms a reservoir that contains over half of the body's monocytes.[4] these monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (such as the heart after myocardial infarction), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing.[4][5][6] the spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections.[7]
in humans the spleen is brownish in color and is located in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.

the small intestine develops from the midgut of the primitive gut tube.[14] by the fifth week of embryological life, the ileum begins to grow longer at a very fast rate, forming a u-shaped fold called the primary intestinal loop. the loop grows so fast in length that it outgrows the abdomen and protrudes through the umbilicus. by week 10, the loop retracts back into the abdomen. between weeks six and ten the small intestine rotates anticlockwise, as viewed from the front of the embryo. it rotates a further 180 degrees after it has moved back into the abdomen. this process creates the twisted shape of the large intestine

the small intestine receives a blood supply from the coeliac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery. these are both branches of the aorta. the duodenum receives blood from the coeliac trunk via the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery and from the superior mesenteric artery via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. these two arteries both have anterior and posterior branches that meet in the midline and anastomose. the jejunum and ileum receive blood from the superior mesenteric artery.[13] branches of the superior mesenteric artery form a series of arches within the mesentery known as arterial arcades, which may be several layers deep. straight blood vessels known as vasa recta travel from the arcades closest to the ileum and jejunum to the organs themselves.

staffing[edit]
in the year ending at march 2017, there were 1.187 million staff in the nhs, 1.9% more than in march 2016.[41]

in the same year, there were 691,000 nurses registered in the uk, down 1,783 from the previous year. however, this is the first time nursing numbers have fallen since 2008 and there are 13,000 more nurses in the nhs than in 2010. poor working conditions, staffing levels and workload also dissatisfaction with the quality of patient care were given as reasons as were poor pay and benefits. saffron cordery of nhs providers said, these figures provide further evidence of the severe workforce problems nhs trusts face. burseries to nursing students are to be stopped forcing nurses to pay for their training, it is expected this will also be a discouragement.[42] commentators are increasingly arguing that staffing shortages are endangering the sustinability of the nhs. there are too few health workers, nurses and midwives, doctors are also in short supply. hospitals, community trusts and mental health trusts all face shortages.[43] some general practitioners are losing sleep because they worry work pressure may have lead them to miss something that puts a patient at risk.[44] in hospitals junior doctors are sometimes forced to do work beyond what they have been trained for. this is stressful for doctors and puts patients at risk. overworked consultants do not have the time to carry out proper supervision of less qualified doctors.[45]

effect of brexit[edit]
the plan to exit the european union will affect physicians from eu countries, about 11% of the physician workforce.[46] many of these physicians feel unwelcome and are considering leaving the uk if brexit happens, as they have doubts that they and their families can live in the country.[46] a survey suggests 60% are considering leaving.[47] record numbers of eu nationals (17,197 eu staff working in the nhs which include nurses and doctors) left last year. the figures, put together by nhs digital, lead to calls to reassure european workers over their future in the uk.[48] eu nurses registering to work in the uk are down 96% since the brexit vote aggravating shortages of nurses. janet davies of the royal college of nursing, said, “we rely on the contributions of eu staff and this drop in numbers could have severe consequences for patients and their families. our nursing workforce is in a state of crisis. across our health service, from a&e to elderly care, this puts patients at serious risk.

proprietary operating system[edit]
in 2001 the nhs entered into a licensing deal with microsoft, ignoring the advice of some of its own it specialists that had recommended investing in linux instead.[54] concerns about the vulnerability of nhs computer systems to cyber-attack have been expressed since at least 2016.[55] nhs computer systems have been subject to cyber attacks of which one in may 2017 was notable.[56] the may 2017 attack lead to the cancellation of at least 6912 appointments including operations, 139 suspected cancer patients had urgent referrals cancelled. the number of gp appointments cancelled, the number of ambulances diverted from a&e departments unable to treat some patients, the number of delays in receiving information like test results are unknown. north korea is strongly suspected of starting the attack. the attack happened on a friday in may. a cyberattack on a monday in winter would be even more damaging.[57] nhs computers have been vulnerable because a minority still use or used windows xp, an outdated system that originated in 2001, and one which microsoft stopped supporting with security patches. complacency among nhs staff and among government departments that pay for computer security are blamed. unless systems are upgraded, more cyber attacks are feared.[58] dr david wrigley of the british medical association said, “it’s been known about for years, that the software isn’t up to date across the nhs, so it’s not unpredictable that this situation should have arisen. but it’s disappointing that funding hasn’t been given to upgrade the system. it needs urgent action by politicians.”

performance[edit]
in 2014 the nuffield trust and the health foundation produced a report comparing the performance of the nhs in the four countries of the uk since devolution in 1999. they included data for the north east of england as an area more similar to the devolved areas than the rest of england. they found that there was little evidence that any one country was moving ahead of the others consistently across the available indicators of performance. there had been improvements in all four countries in life expectancy and in rates of mortality amenable to health care. despite the hotly contested policy differences between the four countries there was little evidence, where there was comparable data, of any significant differences in outcomes. the authors also complained about the increasingly limited set of comparable data on the four health systems of the uk.[18]

rising social costs have led to a significant increase in the time between patients being declared medically fit and finding social care placements in many cases.[19]

political criticism[edit]
the performance of the nhs in wales has been used by uk prime minister david cameron as an illustration of what he views as mismanagement by welsh labour. criticism is chiefly about waiting times for diagnostics and surgery, the absence of a cancer drugs fund and the fact that very few private providers are used to keep waiting lists down. the welsh border was described by david cameron as 'a line between life and death'.[20] andrew r. t. davies claimed that the labour-run welsh nhs is fast becoming one of the conservatives' key electoral assets ahead of next year's general election. he launched a survey of attitudes to the nhs in 2014 which concluded that the welsh held the nhs dear to their hearts, though almost two-thirds of respondents felt the performance of the welsh nhs had declined in recent years. the survey found a wide range of problems caused by a lack of resources. staff complained that whistleblowers risked professional suicide and some patients said complaints or concerns were not taken seriously by nhs managers[21]

nhs wales is governed by what its critics describe as a post-war structure: with seven separate regional health boards, each dominated by labour supporters – the taffia.[22]

defenders of the nhs in wales point out that it operates on £1,900 per person compared with the north east of england which is similar to wales in terms of need and gets £2,100 per person. while some waiting lists such as orthopaedic surgery may be longer in wales some other aspects of the service such as cancer care are better in wales. english figures are not collected and reported on the same basis as welsh ones.[23] 90% patients who used welsh hospitals and gps in 2013 were satisfied or very satisfied with their care. in contrast across britain as a whole only 60% said they were satisfied with the nhs.[24]

in october 2014 the daily mail claimed that around half of welsh cancer sufferers must wait six weeks or more for many scans and tests yet in england ... the comparable figure is less than 6%. the welsh government responded by pointing out that targets for timely treatment of cancer were the same in wales as in england, for example that 98% not on the urgent pathway should start definitive treatment within the target time of 31 days. on the latest figures the performance in wales was actually slightly better than in england. wales has a specific waiting time target for diagnostic tests, different from england – the maximum wait for access to specified diagnostic tests is 8 weeks. in august 2014 24,107 patients were waiting more than 8 weeks for diagnostic tests in wales; 70% receive their tests within the target time.[25] it defending the decision not to set up a cancer drugs fund as in england, on the ground that the fund's own chair has admitted it provides funding for cancer drugs which have 'no impact on survival' and 'uncertainty as to whether quality of life is improved or not' and pointed out that the all-wales medicines strategy group got new drugs such as sativex approved for use in wales more quickly than the national institute for health and care excellence in england.[26]

in february 2016 the organisation for economic co-operation and development published a review which concluded that performance of the nhs in wales was little different from that in the rest of the uk. they described performance across the uk as fairly mediocre saying that great policies were not being translated into great practices. they suggested that gps should be more involved in health boards and that resources should be shifted out of hospitals.[27]

complaints[edit]
it was reported that there had been 10,395 recorded staff complaints about staffing levels between 2012 and 2015. the highest number of complaints (3,609) related to cardiff and vale university health board. the government response was that since 1999, the total number of staff working in the welsh nhs had increased by a third. in 2015 there were 2,000 gps working in the nhs in wales, the highest number ever and an increase of 11% since 2003. the number of nursing, midwifery and health visiting staff increased from 28,157 in 2010 to 28,300 in 2014.[

the systems are 98.8% funded from general taxation and national insurance contributions, plus small amounts from patient charges for some services.[23][24] about 10% of gdp is spent on health and most is spent in the public sector.[25] the money to pay for the nhs comes directly from taxation. the 2008/9 budget roughly equates to a contribution of £1,980 per person in the uk.[26]

when the nhs was launched in 1948 it had a budget of £437 million (roughly £9 billion at today’s prices).[27] in 2008/9 it received over 10 times that amount (more than £100 billion). in 1955/6 health spending was 11.2% of the public services budget. in 2015/6 it was 29.7%.[28] this equates to an average rise in spending over the full 60-year period of about 4% a year once inflation has been taken into account. under the blair government investment levels increased to around 6% a year on average. since 2010 spending growth has been constrained to just over 1% a year.[28]

some 60% of the nhs budget is used to pay staff. a further 20% pays for drugs and other supplies, with the remaining 20% split between buildings, equipment, training costs, medical equipment, catering and cleaning. nearly 80% of the total budget is distributed by local trusts in line with the particular health priorities in their areas.[29] since 2010, there has been a cap of 1% on pay rises for staff continuing in the same role. unions representing doctors, dentists, nurses and other health professionals have called on the government to end the cap on health service pay, claiming the cap is damaging the health service and damaging patient care.[30] the pay rise is likely to be below the level of inflation and to mean a real-terms pay cut.[31] the house of commons library did research showing that real-terms nhs funding per head will fall in 2018-19, and stay the same for two years afterwards.

criticism[edit]
research indicates that society does not support the prioritisation of cancer drugs over other treatments.[11] the financial times attacked the fund in december 2014 as a populist gesture that gives the impression of benefiting patients, but in fact rewards poor quality drugs while benefiting a handful of pharmaceutical companies at the expense of the taxpayer and the full range of nhs patients, complaining that it undermined the national institute for health and care excellence.[12] james le fanu writing in the daily telegraph said this mechanism for diverting taxpayers’ money to enhance, to little or no purpose, the profits of big pharma might be more aptly named “the drug company fund”.[13] in february 2015 york university researchers reported that the fund represented particularly poor value, diverting money from other patient services and that for every healthy year gained by this fund, five qalys could be lost across the nhs.[14]

in december 2014 andy burnham announced that a labour government would replace the fund with a cancer treatment fund which would pay not only for innovative cancer drugs, but also for surgery and radiotherapy. it could mean increased access to advanced forms of radiotherapy such as intensity modulated radiotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiotherapy.[15]

in july 2015 the independent cancer taskforce established by nhs england proposed reform of the fund, which the taskforce said was “no longer sustainable or desirable… in its current form”.[16]

professor karl claxton, a health economist at the university of york, says that the fund should be scrapped because the money would be better used on 21,000 patients with heart, lung and gastro-intestinal diseases who are denied cost effective evidence based treatment,[17] arguing that the principal beneficiary of the fund is 'big pharma'.[18]

in september 2015 the national audit office reported that no data had been collected on the 74,000 patients whose treatment had been funded, at a cost of nearly £1 billion, so it was impossible to discover whether the treatment had been effective.[19]

the public accounts committee published a report on the fund in february 2016 which concluded that there was no evidence the fund was benefiting patients, extending lives or a good use of taxpayers' money.[20]

prof richard sullivan, of king's college london and dr ajay aggarwal of the london school of hygiene & tropical medicine published a study in the annals of oncology in april 2017. he concluded that the initiative as initially established was a huge waste of money and a major policy error. the researchers studied the 47 treatments that were being funded by january 2015, of which only 18% met internationally recognised criteria for being deemed clinically beneficial. for those drugs where there was some evidence of benefit, the average was an extra 3.2 months of survival. the majority of patients were exposed to unpleasant side effects for no benefit. £1.27 billion was spent on the fund during the period studied.[21] no usable data was collected on what happened to patients whose treatment was funded - such as measuring how long they lived, their quality of life or side-effects. there was no consideration of the relative merits of surgery and radiotherapy.[22]

the national health service (nhs) is the collective name as well as the name used individually for each of the four public health services in the united kingdom: the national health service in england, nhs scotland, nhs wales, and health and social care in northern ireland. they were established together in 1948 as one of the major social reforms following the second world war. the founding principles were being comprehensive, universal and free at the point of delivery.[1] today, each provides a comprehensive range of health services which are free for people ordinarily resident in the united kingdom apart from dental treatment and optical care.[2] (the english nhs also requires patients to pay prescription charges though there is a range of exemptions from these charges.)

each of the uk's health service systems operates independently, and is politically accountable to the relevant government: the scottish government, welsh government, the northern ireland executive, and the uk government which is responsible for england's nhs. nhs wales was originally part of the same structure as england until powers over the nhs in wales were firstly transferred to the secretary of state for wales in 1969 and thereafter, in 1999, to the welsh assembly as part of welsh devolution. however, some functions might be routinely performed by one health service on behalf of another. for example, northern ireland has no high-security psychiatric hospitals and thus depends on using hospitals in great britain, routinely at carstairs hospital in scotland for male patients and rampton secure hospital in england for female patients.[3] similarly, patients in north wales use specialist facilities in manchester and liverpool which are much closer than facilities in cardiff, and more routine services at the countess of chester hospital. there have been issues about cross-border payments.[4]

growing numbers of patients taken to hospital by ambulance are having to wait an hour or more before they are handed over to a&e staff for treatment, nhs england figures show.

in the week to last sunday, 17 december, one in seven such patients faced a delay of at least 30 minutes in the back of an ambulance or an area of the hospital where the crew look after them, up from one in eight the week before.

hospitals are finding it impossible to stick to tough rules brought in for this winter by nhs england and nhs improvement requiring that no patient should have to wait more than 15 minutes.


alarm over sharp rise in ambulance patient deaths in england
 read more
in a further sign of the extra pressure the nhs is under this winter, the number of times a&e units had to temporarily divert patients elsewhere because they could not cope with the demand for care rose from 25 the previous week to 30.

gateshead hospital trust had to do so nine times, including four times on 13 december alone, while the main trust providing acute care in worcestershire did it eight times.

the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “patients should be under no illusions: there has been an appalling winter downturn across our nhs over the past month. despite the heroic efforts of our brilliant nhs staff, it’s unacceptable that so many patients have been stuck in the back of ambulances for such a long time.”

in the week to 17 december, 14,323 patients in england (15% of the total) waited at least half an hour before they were handed over for a&e care, up from 11,852 the previous week, a 21% increase.

of those patients, 10,899 were unable to access a&e care for between 30 and 60 minutes, up from 9,515 the week before, and 3,424 waited at least an hour, up from 2,337.

a total of 95,392 patients arrived by ambulance at hospital emergency departments in england last week.

some trusts fared significantly worse than the england average: at least one in three patients in 11 trusts waited 30 minutes or more before being admitted to a&e.

according to official nhs figures 93% of ambulance patients arriving at lancashire teaching hospitals nhs foundation trust and half of ambulance patients attending united lincolnshire hospitals nhs trust had to wait 30 minutes or more.


ashworth said that during the first month of winter a total of 46,993 patients had had to wait in the back of ambulances for more than 30 minutes, and 9,775 had had to wait for longer than an hour. “there has been an 86% rise in the number of delays for over one hour in just the past two weeks as the cold snap has hit,” he said.

the chief nursing officer for england’s summit 2018 offers an opportunity for the senior nursing, midwifery and care leadership community to explore how to deal with current challenges and use their collective leadership and ambition to shape the future of our health and care system.

the summit will include international speakers and leaders from across the health and care system in england and will take place on 7 and 8 march 2018 at the acc liverpool.

the general and acute bed occupancy rate in hospitals rose from 94.6% to 95%, far above the 85% level experts consider the maximum to maintain safe patient care.

slightly fewer beds – 1,071 a day on average – were closed last week as a result of norovirus, the winter vomiting bug. but nhs england said the number of incidents was growing.

for example, norovirus forced northumbria healthcare in the north-east to close and seal seven wards at four of its hospitals. “every year we are affected by norovirus but this is the worst it’s been for a few years. all our main sites have people with the bug on them in some shape or form,” said dr jeremy rushmer, the trust’s medical director.

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb said: “these figures show the nhs is under huge strain as we enter the christmas period. hospitals are suffering from a severe lack of beds and a&es are already under intolerable pressure.

“no patient should ever have to wait in pain in the back of an ambulance outside a&e, yet this is now becoming a routine occurrence across the country.”
nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp)
most people would be shocked to know that around 22,000 people with diabetes die early every year. type 2 diabetes is a leading cause of preventable sight loss in people of working age and is a major contributor to kidney failure, heart attack, and stroke.

there are currently 3.4 million people with type 2 diabetes in england with around 200,000 new diagnoses every year. while type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented and is not linked to lifestyle, type 2 diabetes is largely preventable through lifestyle changes.

one in six of all people in hospital have diabetes – while diabetes is often not the reason for admission, they often need a longer stay in hospital, are more likely to be re admitted and their risk of dying is higher.

as well as the human cost, type 2 diabetes treatment accounts for just under nine per cent of the annual nhs budget. this is around £8.8 billion a year.

there are currently five million people in england at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. if these trends persist, one in three people will be obese by 2034 and one in 10 will develop type 2 diabetes.

there is strong international evidence which demonstrates how behavioural interventions, which support people to maintain a healthy weight and be more active, can significantly reduce the risk of developing the condition.

the healthier you: nhs diabetes prevention programme (nhs dpp) identifies those at high risk and refers them onto a behaviour change programme.

the nhs dpp is a joint commitment from nhs england, public health england and diabetes uk.

we are currently piloting a digital stream of the nhs diabetes prevention programme.
nhs england is an executive non-departmental public body (ndpb) of the department of health.

nhs england oversees the budget, planning, delivery and day-to-day operation of the commissioning side of the nhs in england as set out in the health and social care act 2012.[1] it holds the contracts for gps and nhs dentists. the secretary of state publishes, annually, a document known as the mandate which specifies the objectives which the board should seek to achieve. national health service (mandate requirements) regulations are published each year to give legal force to the mandate.

nhs england employs around 6,500 staff in 50 sites around england. most of its staff previously worked for the decommissioned primary care trusts and strategic health authorities.
nhs england is the operating name of the nhs commissioning board and, before that, the nhs commissioning board authority.[2] it was set up as a special health authority of the nhs in october 2011 as the forerunner to becoming an ndpb on 1 april 2013.[3] it was renamed nhs england on 26 march 2013.[4] its legal name remains the nhs commissioning board.

sir david nicholson who became chief executive at the establishment of the board retired at the end of march 2014 and was replaced by simon stevens. one of stevens' first acts was to announce a restructure of its 27 area teams in response to a requirement to reduce running costs which would reduce staffing by around 500.[5] the 27 teams outside london were reduced to 12 in 2015.[6]

system management[edit]
it produced a planning document the five year forward view in october 2014 which envisaged development of new models to suit local needs.

nhs england in conjunction with the other central regulators established what is called a success regime in south and mid essex, north cumbria and north east and western devon in june 2015. it is intended to tackle “deep rooted and systemic issues that previous interventions have not tackled across [a] whole health and care economy”.[7]

in 2016 it organised the geographical division of england into 44 sustainability and transformation plan areas with populations between 300,000 and 3 million. these areas were locally agreed between nhs trusts, local authorities and clinical commissioning groups. a leader was appointed for each area, who is to be responsible for the implementation of the plans which are to be agreed by the component organisations. they will be working across organisational boundaries to help build a consensus for transformation and the practical steps to deliver it.[8]

in april 2017 it introduced a capped expenditure process applied to nhs commissioners and providers in the 13 areas across england with the largest budget deficits. it is intended to reduce their spending by around £500 million, and health leaders were told to ‘think the unthinkable’.[9]

operational pressures escalation levels framework[edit]
in october 2016 it introduced a new system for the management of operational difficulties in english hospitals, replacing the rather poorly defined system of red and black alerts which were locally defined. there are 4 opel levels. level 1 is a state of normality. level 4 is a major crisis requiring external intervention either regionally or nationally.[10] this is intended, among other things, to enable comparisons of trends over time and between different areas. [11]

primary care[edit]
applications by gps to reduce their catchment area are dealt with by nhs england. requests to reduce the number of patients eligible to join a practice and in some cases also to deregister existing patients, have risen with 26 made between april and october 2014 compared to 30 for the whole of 2013/14. only 15 have been approved.[12]

in november 2014 mr justice popplewell declared that nhs england “has acted unlawfully by reason of its failure to make arrangements for the involvement of patients in primary care commissioning decisions as required by the national health service act 2006”. the case involved the decision to scrap minimum practice income guarantee. richard stein, a partner at leigh day, said the declaration could mean that patients would have to be involved in discussions on changes to the gp contract.[13]

nhs england awarded a 4-year contract to capita to become sole provider of administrative services including payment administration, management of medical records, and eligibility lists for practitioners for gps, opticians and dentists across the uk in june 2015.[14]

see also general medical services

information technology[edit]
the organisation was reported to be developing a strategy to support the use of personal health records in june 2015. this, it is hoped, could achieve up to £3.4 billion in annual efficiency savings by 2020.[15] in april 2016 it published an index of digital maturity, where each of the 239 nhs trusts assessed its own readiness, capabilities and enabling infrastructure.[16][17]

specialist commissioning[edit]
specialised services are those provided in relatively few hospitals, accessed by comparatively small numbers of patients but with catchment populations of usually more than one million. these services tend to be located in specialised hospital trusts that can recruit a team of staff with the appropriate expertise. nhs england is responsible for commissioning £15.6 billion of specialised services and for dealing with individual funding requests in respect of the specialist services it commissions.

it was criticised for delays in deciding on a policy for the prescription of everolimus in the treatment of tuberous sclerosis. twenty doctors addressed a letter to the board in support of the charity tuberous sclerosis association saying around 32 patients with critical need, whose doctors believe everolimus treatment is their best or only option, have no hope of access to funding. most have been waiting many months. approximately half of these patients are at imminent risk of a catastrophic event (renal bleed or kidney failure) with a high risk of preventable death.[18] in may 2015 it was reported that luke henry and stephanie rudwick, the parents of a child suffering from tuberous sclerosis were trying to sell their home in brighton to raise the money to pay for treatment for their daughter bethany who has tumours on her brain, kidneys and liver and suffers from up to fifty epileptic fits a day.[19]

it authorises and pays for treatment of narcolepsy with sodium oxybate by means of individual funding requests on the basis of exceptional circumstances. in may 2016 the high court ordered nhs england to provide funding to treat a teenager with severe narcolepsy. the judge criticised their “thoroughly bad decision” and “absurd” policy discriminating against the girl when hundreds of other nhs patients already receive the drug. the department of health is also paying for the treatment of people whose narcolepsy was caused by the swine flu vaccine pandemrix in 2009-10 by means of private prescriptions outside the national health service.[20]

arbitration[edit]
the organisation's responsibilities include arbitration in disputes between clinical commissioning groups and nhs trusts.[21]
clinical commissioning groups (ccgs) are nhs organisations set up by the health and social care act 2012 to organise the delivery of nhs services in england.[1] 211 groups were established in 2013 and there was resistance to any proposals for mergers between groups although gateshead ccg, newcastle north & east ccg and newcastle west ccg merged in 1 april 2015. during 2016 it appeared that further mergers would be permitted and an official procedure was published in november 2016 by nhs england.[2] during 2017 further proposals for merger appeared. 83 ccgs were sharing chief officers in march 2017, which may be a precursor to merger. if all those led to merger there would be 174 groups.[3]

to a certain extent they replace primary care trusts (pcts), though some of the staff and responsibilities moved to local authority public health teams when pcts ceased to exist in april 2013. services directly provided by pcts were reorganised through the transforming community services programme.
ccgs are clinically led groups that include all of the gp groups in their geographical area. the aim of this is to give gps and other clinicians the power to influence commissioning decisions for their patients.[1][4]

ccgs are overseen by nhs england (including its regional offices and area teams). these structures manage primary care commissioning, including holding the nhs contracts for gp practices nhs.[5]

each ccg has a constitution and is run by its governing body. each has to have an accountable officer responsible for the ccg’s duties, functions, finance and governance. most ccgs initially appointed former pct managers to these posts.[6] only a quarter of accountable officers were gps in october 2014, but 80% of ccg chairs were gps.[7] only half of gp practices said they felt involved in ccg decision making processes.[8] the health and social care act 2012 provides that the areas specified in the constitutions of clinical commissioning groups together cover the whole of england, and do not coincide or overlap. each ccg is responsible for persons who are provided with primary medical services by a member of the group, and persons who usually reside in the group’s area and are not provided with primary medical services by a member of any clinical commissioning group.

e-reward, an online pay research service, analysed the pay of more than 2,500 managers at the 211 ccgs in england in 2015. they reported that 56% of 225 top executives – chief officers and chief finance officers – were paying themselves more than the salary range recommended by nhs england of £95,000 to £125,000 a year.[9]

unite the union surveyed the 3,392 ccg board members in 2015 and reported that 513 were directors of private healthcare companies: 140 owned such businesses and 105 carried out external work for them. more than 400 ccg board members were shareholders in such companies.[10] the kings fund and the nuffield trust ran a survey of gps in six areas of england in 2016 and found that more than 70% were at least “somewhat” engaged with the work of their ccg, though only 20% of those without a formal role in their ccg said they could influence the work of their ccg if they chose to.[11]

lakeside healthcare applied to move from corby ccg (where it had 2/3 of the registered population) to nene ccg in 2015, but nene refused to accept it.[12]

during 2017 mergers between ccgs began, having previously been forbidden.[13] gps in staffordshire submitted a vote of no confidence in their local ccgs in protest against a proposed merger. the merger between liverpool, south sefton and southport and formby ccgs was stopped while and investigation into liverpool ccg's governance and management of conflicts of interest was carried out, leading to the resignation of several of its leaders. there were also similar investigations in hackney and crawley.[14]

in october 2017, it was announced that brighton and hove clinical commissioning group was to merge with brighton and hove city council, to form a health and social care integration board: the merge, commencing in april 2018 and culminating in a full merger a year later, is intended to prevent the duplication of work and streamline provision of health and social care within the city.
a national health service trust is an organisation within the english nhs generally serving either a geographical area or a specialised function (such as an ambulance service). in any particular location there may be several trusts involved in the different aspects of healthcare for a resident.
nhs trusts were established under the national health service and community care act 1990 and were set up in five waves. each one was established by a statutory instrument.

the trusts are not trusts in the legal sense but are in effect public sector corporations. each trust is headed by a board consisting of executive and non-executive directors, and is chaired by a non-executive director. there were about 2,200 non-executives across 470 organisations in the nhs in england in 2015.[1] non-executive directors are recruited by open advertisement. all trusts (foundation trusts and those which have yet to reach foundation trust status) are regulated by nhs improvement. board members are, from november 2014, subject to a fit and proper person test.

all trust boards are required to have an audit committee consisting only of non-executive directors, on which the chair may not sit. this committee is entrusted not only with supervision of financial audit, but of systems of corporate governance within the trust. hospital board members have a duty to act on signals of poor performance on quality and safety data, and yet many of the papers presented to them have been found to be lacking good data visualisations.[2]

future development[edit]
in september 2015 jeremy hunt was reported as saying “i think we do have too many trusts as independent organisations in a context where mergers between trusts and the establishment of chains of hospitals were being discussed.[3] subsequently simon stevens made it clear that he did not expect the remaining nhs trusts to become foundation trusts, saying we are frankly kidding ourselves if we think the non-fts are going to pass the kinds of criteria that have been set by monitor.[4]

the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.


the national health service executive (nhs executive) was part of the british department of health established in 1996. it advised ministers on the development of nhs policy and was responsible for the effective management of the nhs. the executive ceased to exist on 1 april 2002 when 4 regional directorates of health and social care were established and the central functions were reabsorbed into the department of health.[1] the regional directorates were abolished in 2003.[2]

the functions of the nhs executive were provided through the headquarters (mainly in leeds and london) and eight regional offices which replaced the former regional health authorities. the information management group (img) was part of the nhs executive made up jointly of civil servants and nhs staff. the img formed part of the human and corporate resources directorate, represented on the nhs executive board by ken jarrold. their aim was to improve the ability of the nhs to harness and benefit from the management of information and the use of information technology. one of their key objectives was to promote and implement the nhs executive's national information management and technology (im&t) strategy. the img worked with other parts of the nhs executive and the wider department of health to identify and secure the information technology implications of national policy initiatives.

shifting the balance of power
contents next page previous page
background
2.21 the nhs plan sets out a vision for service designed around the patient - a service of high quality and national standards which is fast, convenient and uses modern methods to provide care where and when it is needed. such a service will not only be designed around patients but also be responsive to them, offer them choices and involve them in decision making and planning.

the secretary of state announced on 25 april 2001 a programme to shift the balance of power within the nhs away from central government and towards front line staff and their patients. under the arrangements set out in secretary of state's shifting the balance of power speech local clinicians and managers, working in primary care trusts and nhs trusts, were to be empowered to ensure that local services reflect the needs of the local community. 'shifting the balance of power' is about putting patients and staff absolutely at the heart of the nhs by empowering them and changing the culture and structure of the nhs to reflect this.

preparing for change
in july 2001 the department published shifting the balance of power within the nhs - securing delivery, (2.29) detailing the proposed changes and inviting responses in a discussion period. over 400 responses were received from the service as well as the major national representative bodies. there was general support for the direction of change, although there were many queries about the detailed implementation of the proposals. shifting the balance of power - the next steps(2.30) was published in january 2002. this document addressed the major issues raised in the discussion period. it set out the framework and principles for the changes but - inline with its own philosophy - left the practical arrangements, the how, when and where of working arrangements and service delivery - to be decided locally. consultation on the boundaries of the new health authorities took place in autumn 2001 and the new boundaries were subsequently confirmed along with the chairs and chief executives (designate). franchise plans were then developed by the chief executives outlining how they intended to run their organisations, based on a specification set by the department.

structural changes
much progress has been made in developing and implementing the structural changes:

england's 95 previous health authorities were abolished on 1 april 2002.
much of the planning and commissioning work previously carried out by these health authorities has been passed to just over 300 primary care trusts, which by 2004 will be controlling over 75 per cent of nhs funding.
28 new health authorities (set to become strategic health authorities in october 2002, subject to legislation) serving populations of around 1.5 million were also established on 1 april, responsible for developing strategy and performance managing pcts and nhs trusts, so as to secure delivery and consistency of approach. they will in effect manage the nhs locally on behalf of the department.
the department of health has also been re-focusing to reflect the new structure. four new directorates of health and social care became operational on 1 april with responsibility for working directly with the nhs and performance managing the new health authorities while the regional offices are to be abolished.
as a result of these changes, £100 million will be freed up by 2004 to spend on childcare facilities for nhs staff as an aid to recruitment and retention.

delivering the nhs plan
plans for devolving power to locally run services - within a framework of clear national standards - were strengthened in the department's delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform (2.31) document, published in april 2002. this document builds on the structural and cultural changes of shifting the balance of power.

further information
further information is available on the dh web-site at:

department of health 'shifting the balance of power: securing delivery'
department of health 'shifting the balance of power: the next steps'
department of health 'delivering the nhs plan - next steps on investment, next steps on reform.

planet health cymru launched at walking and cycling conference
thursday, 4 november 2010
planet health cymru, a new web resource for all those working in the built and natural environment and health, was launched at the third annual walking and cycling conference.
 
the resource encourages collaborative working and provides information and signposting to the planning sector; allowing them to incorporate health considerations in their decision making on future developments.
 
it was developed by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales, managed by public health wales.
 
planet health cymru (planning for environment, transport and health) www.planethealthcymru.org seeks to provide a ‘one-stop-shop’ for people working in health, the green and urban environments, design and architecture, regeneration, sustainability, transport and community development amongst others.
 
the welsh assembly government aims to encourage physical activity and give due prominence to walking and cycling through development and infrastructure planning and decision making. the new website is one means of supporting this aim, set out in planning policy wales and creating an active wales.
 
the work has been led by the physical activity and nutrition networks wales working with a wide-ranging advisory board which includes representatives from the welsh assembly government, royal town planners institute, welsh local government association, design commission wales, institute of civil engineers, centre for regeneration excellence in wales, the transport consortia and countryside council for wales.
 
su mably, consultant in public health for public health wales who oversaw the development of the project commented, “we have the opportunity to learn from the lessons of the past, for example the tower blocks built in the 1950s and 1960s, when not much consideration was given to how these homes would impact on residents’ mental, social and physical health.
 
“planet health cymru is an excellent tool which will allow all those working in planning, regeneration, transport, design and health to consider the health of the local people when developing new projects.”
 
the minister for environment, sustainability and housing, jane davidson said: “today’s walking and cycling conference is all about encouraging people in wales to make healthy and sustainable travel choices.
 
“if we are to succeed in this ambition we must make walking and cycling as safe and easy as possible. the planning of our villages, towns and cities is key to this and i am delighted that the planet cymru web resource will help to ensure that health considerations are fully factored into the planning process.”
 
dr tony jewell, chief medical officer for wales, added: “it is important to give people information to enable them to make informed choices in an effort to improve their health and well-being. it is crucial to make health choices, easy choices. how we plan and build our towns and cities is key to making easier choices – making it easier for people to walk or cycle to the shops or to school, rather than use the car, or to have local spaces to walk or relax.

public health wales is the national public health agency in wales and exists to protect and improve health and wellbeing and reduce health inequalities for people in wales. we are part of the nhs and report to the cabinet secretary for health, well-being and sport in the welsh government.

with a strong board, 1,700 staff and a budget of £106 million, the organisation employs the majority of the specialist public health resource in wales. 

we provide advice, expertise and specialist services to welsh government (working across departments), the seven health boards, two nhs trusts, 22 local authorities, other agencies and to the population of wales.
 
we provide the public health knowledge, scientific expertise and intelligence to lead transformational change and to drive a focus on ensuring that we deliver tangible improvements in health and wellbeing outcomes and reduce health inequalities in wales. 

health and local government are among the devolved areas in wales and therefore, working nationally and locally, public health wales has access to both policy levers and local delivery systems by working closely with our partners. 

each of the seven health boards in wales employs a director of public health who is supported by the critical mass of expertise employed by public health wales at the local and community level and who, under an honorary contract, manages locally based public health wales staff. 

public health wales, health boards and local authorities work closely together to promote public health in their areas and jointly identify and set the local strategic agenda in partnership with communities, housing, education, police, fire and rescue and the voluntary sector. 
 
 
 cartrefu, which means to reside in welsh, is a four year programme run by gwanwyn which aims to improve access to quality arts experiences for older people in residential care.

between 2015 and 2017 age cymru recruited 16 professional artists in four different fields: performing arts, visual arts, words and music. these artists each delivered eight 8-week residencies across the length and breadth of wales, introducing a mix of established art forms and new activities residents may not have had the chance to experience before.

cartrefu has been a huge success and over the past two years our artists have delivered over 1,000 art workshops in care homes around wales. age cymru was able to offer these workshops entirely for free due to the generous support from the arts council of wales and the baring foundation.

in 2017 cartrefu re-launched with a brand new team of 12 artists, this time working in care homes for 12 weeks. with our second team of cartrefu artists we want to push the boundaries of what has been attempted in care homes before, and hope to inspire bold and striking new art work from the residents our artists work with.

we hope that cartrefu will foster a greater appreciation of the arts among care home staff as they work with our artists. we want care home staff to gain more confidence and acquire new skills, sharing and practicing them in their daily work with residents.

cartrefu has designed an activity pack for care homes, based on the work our first cartrefu team of artists developed in care homes. the activity pack feature 20 simple but effective activities for care home staff to run with residents and are free to all care homes in wales.

to obtain your free pack, please get in touch with cartrefu project coordinator reg noyes

evaluation report
we recently launched our evalution report in the senedd on tuesday 10 october 2017. 

the evaluation, undertaken by dr katherine algar skaife from the dementia research centre wales at bangor university, found that cartrefu increased the well-being of residents, improved their social skills, and even helped some of them regain long lost abilities like using a knife and fork. it also found that the project had a positive impact on the care home staff with many reporting improved attitudes to residents, especially those with dementia. one carer said “it made me realise residents are more capable than one might give them credit for.”

the evaluation also found that the project developed a group of artists who are now better equipped to work with vulnerable older people in care settings and that the lives of the residents are more like to be reflected in future work undertaken by the artists. you can download a copy of the evaluation report below.

if you'd like more information about our cartrefu project, please contact us or visit the gwanwyn website.

 


funding of clinical commissioning groups[edit]
nhs england allocates funding (of £69.5 billion in 2016/7) to ccgs in accordance with a funding formula. until 2016 progress towards the amount indicated by the formula from the historical allocation was very slow, and ccgs which were above their allocation did not actually suffer a reduction. from april 2016 however ccgs with more than 10% above their fair share will receive flat cash - an effective reduction. this will also ensure than no ccg is more than 5% below its target allocation in 2016/7
an nhs england spokesman said: the recent cold snap has seen hospitals put under pressure, but they are generally coping. additional services and beds will be coming online over the next few weeks funded by the [£337m] winter budget cash released by the government. staff are working hard to ensure ambulance handovers are as smooth as possible.”
taken together, the four national health services in 2015-16 employed around 1.6 million people with a combined budget of £136.7 billion.[5] in 2014 the total health sector workforce across the uk was 2,165,043. this broke down into 1,789,586 in england, 198,368 in scotland, 110,292 in wales and 66,797 in northern ireland.


towards a healthier wales
a commitment to build a healthier nation will be at the top of a plaid cymru government’s priorities. it is a massive challenge, and there are no quick fixes or miracle cures.wales has a legacy of chronic ill-health, especially in some of our poorest communities. it is a sad fact that our country suffers from some of the highest incidences of cardiac disease, respiratory problems and cancers in the western world.

as well as securing better provision and prompter availability of health services, the building of a healthier society involves longerterm measures aimed at improving the general health and well-being of all our people. health means much more than the absence of disease; it implies a sense of well-being, vigour and fulfilment.this is influenced by a range of factors in which the delivery of health services is only part – albeit a vital one.

the creation of a healthy nation is a project which must involve all our people, all our services, and all government departments. it calls for waging war on poverty, strengthening our economy, building a fairer society and safer communities, good houses and a pleasant environment, and a rich cultural life for this reason every department in a plaid cymru government will need to show how its work and decisions contribute to this task.

action is required on at least three fronts:

tackling the poverty that causes so much ill health;
increasing the capacity of our health services to deliver speedy and effective treatment to the sick and needy;
the promotion of healthy lifestyles.
(a) poverty and ill-health
there is now indisputable evidence of the link between poverty and ill health. not only are the poorest the sickest members of our society, but illness of itself is also a key generator of poverty. clear evidence of this link was provided by the black report in 1980, but the conservative government of the time chose to ignore its findings and the problems grew worse. more recent research has highlighted the link and the deep seated nature of the problems caused by poverty. a plaid cymru government will ensure that a full understanding of this destructive synergy between poverty and sickness will be mainstreamed into all government policy and decision making. further research has shown that the extent of inequality in societies also has a direct effect on levels of sickness.therefore the creation of a fairer society must be a fundamental part of the drive towards a healthier wales.we will ensure that our economic policies will be geared to achieving greater equality, and thus reinforce our efforts to tackle all the determinants of sickness in wales.

(b) health and social services
in the short to medium term, our quest for a healthier wales will depend heavily on improving our health and social services. this is our front line of attack upon illness and disease. these services should be guided by the principles of equality, respect and dignity for all people. organisations exist to provide for people, and it is their responsibility always to strive to enable and promote well-being, responding always to individuals’ interests and choices.

discrimination in the provision of services is unacceptable, and we will take proactive steps to promote equal treatment; ensuring for example that same-sex partners are regarded as next of kin when medical decisions are being made.

responsibility for health is one of the national assembly’s main functions.the nhs accounts for around 35% of the assembly’s budget, which means that £4,158,448 will be spent in 2003-4.the nhs is also wales’ biggest employer, with a total of 87,000 full and part-time staff members, accounting for 7% of the total welsh workforce.

we all admire the dedication of its doctors, nurses, social workers, other health professionals, and the ancillary staff, who perform daily miracles in very difficult circumstances. both they and their clients have been badly let down by governments over the years. our health service today is suffering the effects of 20 years and more of neglect and under-funding under both the conservatives and new labour. in wales, despite having the worst incidence of sickness, we have the least capacity to treat it of any part of the uk. the barnett formula for calculating the national assembly’s block grant takes no account of our ageing population. neither does it take account of the increase in deprivation levels and therefore illness caused by industrial collapse in many communities. the result is that it is well-nigh impossible for expenditure for improved provision to keep up with levels in england, except at the expense of other policy areas, such as housing, transport or economic development, themselves crucial for improving health and well-being. the effect of this is illustrated by the fact that at the beginning of 2003 no-one was waiting over 18 months for an operation in england while the figure for wales was 5,391. this despite the fact that wales has only 5% of the uk population! on top of this, our health service is still suffering from the misguided policies of past conservative governments, whose introduction of the internal market into the nhs has been so damaging.a further blow to health services in wales occurred in 1993, when john redwood in effect abolished strategic national planning. today, patients in wales are paying a heavy price for the decision of tony blair’s government to keep to tory spending plans for its first four years. while we certainly welcome the extra investment that is at long last on its way to the health service,we regard it as still inadequate, and deplore the fact that it has come at least four years too late. lack of spending in health is disproportionate in that the effects of underspending in one year affect succeeding years. for each pound not spent in the late 1990s, much more must be spent now.

in 1999, labour promised that no-one in wales would have to wait more than six months for an out-patient appointment.the figure in february stood at 76,400, as compared to 676 in england. labour must bear full responsibility for failing to deliver on its promises. disguising the truth through spin and double-counting must no longer be allowed to deceive us. the reality is growing waiting times, deficient infrastructure, treatment failures, shortage of medical personnel including nurses, gps and consultants, and a committed workforce demoralised by sheer pressure of work.

in 2003 we face a further threat to the health service with the sixth restructuring in 13 years.we have opposed these so-called ‘reforms’ because they divert resources and attention from the real issue of increasing capacity, and because we do not believe that the new structures will be fit for purpose. the logic behind scrapping the five health authorities and imposing 22 new local health boards (lhbs) is far from apparent, and has been met with a deep-seated anxiety and scepticism among health professionals.as well as the lhbs, various other organisations are to be established, bringing the total number of bodies responsible for health care in wales to 52. there is grave concern about the capacity of many of the lhbs to carry out their duties efficiently and effectively, and their sheer number will reduce the possibility of strategic planning.with the trusts being retained, a key element of the conservatives’ internal market remains in place, despite labour’s claims that one of the purposes of the reorganisation was to tackle it. the costs of setting up and running such an elaborate structure will add up to many millions of pounds, whatever misleading claims are made by the assembly’s health minister.

a plaid cymru government will therefore inherit an under-funded health service newly thrown into the turbulence of an inappropriate reorganisation.

more doctors, nurses, and beds
the immediate priority will be to develop greater capacity in terms of more doctors, nurses, other health professionals, and beds. a plaid cymru government will put in place a detailed and coherent strategy towards this end; and we will co-operate with health professionals to find the best and most efficient ways of delivering these services. on taking office we will begin an immediate audit of the present capacity of the nhs in wales, including the key interfaces with social services, by amending the remit given to derrick wanless in october 2002. once this is complete, in consultation with representatives of the medical and care professions, we will draw up a national capacity plan.this plan will provide an all-wales strategy with short, medium and long term goals for:

more doctors, nurses, dentists, physiotherapists and other health professionals;
the provision of more beds and appropriate equipment in hospitals;
the provision of adequate and suitable nursing and residential care for the elderly;
a campaign aimed at the retention of qualified staff.
hospitals loom large in public consciousness. consequently, in any debate on the nhs, a fact often overlooked is that 90 per cent of health care contact remains at the primary level. recognising the crucial importance of primary care, we will place particular emphasis on gp recruitment as part of our national capacity plan. given the alarming statistics about a looming crisis in the number of gps, and reports of waiting lists for a month or more for a doctor’s appointment, urgent action is clearly needed. in addition to implementing the new gps contract, we will offer an attractive package to encourage gps, including the option of salaried gps, to serve in underprivileged areas where there are severe health needs.

we will be seeking ways of stripping away bureaucratic burdens on staff. doctors, nurses, and other health and social services professionals must be able to concentrate their time on caring for patients, rather than being tied down with unnecessary paperwork. in consultation with representatives of the nursing and medical professions we will also be seeking imaginative and effective ways of skill-mixing. this will not only free up time for doctors to concentrate on making full use of their professional skills, but also enhance the potential of trained nursing staff.

as well as being primary-led, plaid cymru has always insisted that health provision must be community-based in all its aspects.we wish to encourage, where appropriate, a fuller integration of health centres and community hospitals.we will also take steps to ensure that the care and support provided by social services is accessible in health centres and surgeries.this will be part of a drive to develop a closer working partnership between health and social services, and local authorities have a clear role to play in this.

the voluntary sector has a vital role, for example through the hospice movement.we will work closely with the sector to ensure that funding is predictable and stable.

recognising the disruption caused to the nhs by the constant reorganisation of recent years, a plaid cymru government will do everything possible to avoid further restructuring. despite our misgivings, we will do everything possible to make the new system work as well as possible. however, we will be keeping a careful eye on the situation, working closely with professional and patient bodies.we will encourage collaboration among the lhbs, and the objective in the longer term will to integrate their work with the nhs trusts, maintaining the principle of coterminosity, and thus move away from the remaining elements of the internal market.

certain functions are best fulfilled at the national level, including strategic planning and a strategy aimed at generating significant savings through the rationalisation of prescriptions.

(c) older people
it is fundamental and crucial that the enormous contribution made by older people to our society be fully recognised. their accumulated wisdom and experience constitute an invaluable asset which can be of particular benefit to children and young people.we will work with relevant organisations to find ways of maximising this contribution. the stereotyping of the elderly as dependent and infirm is unacceptable as well as inaccurate. however, advancing years bring with them particular needs in relation to care, and it is an indicator of a civilised society that these are properly catered for, if only as a way of acknowledging a lifetime’s commitment to the welfare of others.

we regard the artificial distinction between nursing and personal care needs as particularly damaging. it can inhibit the provision of early medical intervention to prevent ill-health and possible hospitalisation. quite apart from the sheer injustice of such a situation, it imposes unnecessary pressure on the capacity of the health service to treat patients. that is why we deplore the uk government’s refusal to implement the key recommendation of its own royal commission on the long-term care of the elderly: to abolish the distinction between nursing and personal care.the national assembly, unlike the scottish parliament, currently lacks the powers to implement the royal commission’s recommendations, while the injustice of the barnett formula would make it extremely difficult to meet the cost. a party of wales government will press for both these deficiencies to be corrected so that older people in wales can be treated with justice and dignity in the meanwhile much can be achieved in other ways.

we will combat ageism in all its forms, for example by ensuring that assessment for services is made according to need not age, and by developing advocacy and consultation with service users and carers. in this we will work with community health councils and care forum wales.

in order to address the burden on carers, we will be looking at ways of adequately resourcing the national carers’ strategy. older people with needs should have support to enable them to make their own choices about the settings that they regard as most appropriate, and services should be geared to this objective.

we will emphasise the need for early identification of needs and prompt intervention.this will help to reduce admissions to residential and nursing homes and hospitals, and the need for older people to uprooted as their needs change.to this end we will look to the development of integrated multi-disciplinary long-term care teams to provide for older people’s acute, rehabilitation, and assessment needs. an immediate issue is the crisis in the carehome sector which threatens to damage providers and clients alike, as well as exacerbating problems in our hospitals. it is of particular concern that family-run homes which provide the kind of homely environment so valued by clients face particular difficulties.this will need to be included in the wanless review.

older people have the right to maintain as much independence as possible, and the provision of services should be geared to this aim.we will provide las with the resources to pay for free home social care such as home-helps.

(d) others with long-term care needs
people of all ages can have long-term care needs.these should be met according to the same principles as those set out above.

(e) mental health
we will not tolerate any stigmatisation of those who suffer from mental illness.they are among the most vulnerable members of society, and must be given high-quality health care and treatment. we will continue to oppose the proposed mental health act, particularly as its reactionary proposals for the detention and enforced treatment of the mentally ill offend against basic human rights. it lacks any sound scientific basis and will be costly to implement, as the resources do not currently exist.

we support the promotion and expansion of community mental health teams. however, we need to beware of any resultant rationalisation and reduction in beds, causing the centralisation of services. indeed there is an urgent need for additional beds.

(f) children’s services
our proposal to establish a department of education and children’s and young people’s services will strengthen coordination in serving children.we will:

emphasise the need to work with children and families to prevent abuse from occurring;
ensure effective and swift child protection systems.
working in partnership with las, we will give the highest priority to child protection and seek to ensure that no part of the system fails our most vulnerable children.we will work with the children’s commissioner and voluntary and community organisations to take forward the principles outlined in the children’s manifesto.

(g) disability
an area which has seen enormous progress over recent years is in attitudes to and provision for, disabled people. however, discrimination is still common, and the capacity of disabled people to fulfil their potential and contribute to society is still frustrated in too many ways.we recognise that disability issues are fundamentally about equality,which is why the recommendations below go well beyond the scope of health and social care.

a party of wales government will operate on the basis of the “social model” which recognises that it is society that disables the individual. recognising this reality is crucial to implementing equal opportunities.

2003 is the european year of the disabled and we will mark this with a fresh commitment to remove obstacles to real equality.we will work with disability organisations to make improvements in key areas such as:

support and confidence-building programmes and advocacy and advisory services;
equal access to health services and community and leisure activities;
educational opportunities to enhance quality of life;
countering discrimination in employment;
empowerment of service users through promoting direct payments.
we will recognise british sign language (bsl) as a language in its own right and promote its use.

(h) recruitment and retention in social services
as with the nhs, difficulties with recruitment and retention of social services staff inhibit the capacity to provide consistent services of high quality.whereas pay levels contribute to this, morale is also undermined by the burden of bureaucracy and the targetsetting culture, which diverts time and resources from the essential task of serving clients’ needs, and also distorts priorities.

a plaid cymru government will:

emphasise and disseminate good practice;
work with the wales care council and the regional care partnerships on workforce planning and recruitment;
emphasise the right of workers to benefit from training and career development opportunities;
seek to improve job-security and conditions of work;
encourage flexible work opportunities so as to promote equal opportunities, reduce strain, make best use of available skills, and respond better to the needs of users.
(i) the promotion of healthy living
as well as being better than cure, prevention saves money in the long run. a plaid cymru government will seek the necessary powers to introduce free eye tests and free dental checks for all.the additional expenditure will be more than justified in both human and financial terms through the early detection of disease which would result.

we will develop an effective programme of health promotion. present initiatives to reduce smoking and encourage the eating of fresh fruit and vegetables, though laudable enough, are too narrowly focused on the individual. as a result they have had little impact where most needed. our programme for health promotion will be evidence-based and focused on communities.

we will learn lessons from other european countries and regions where community based initiatives have been successful in tackling entrenched problems of ill-health.

our programme will in particular build on the communities first programme.there will be a focus on achieving recognisable health gain in the hundred most deprived wards which will be designated as community health action zones. healthy living will be promoted through our early years educare programme we will act upon the national assembly’s resolution to seek primary legislation specific to wales to ban smoking in certain public buildings.

we will also issue guidelines to schools to discourage the selling of sugar-saturated drinks and fat-saturated foods to our children, and ensure that school meals are healthy, nutritious and attractive. learning from the lessons of the powys food initiative we will also work with local uthorities to develop procurement policies so as to favour local sourcing of good quality produce.

we will build upon and extend current initiatives for free access to swimming pools and leisure centres, particularly for children and young people and in disadvantaged communities.

a plaid cymru government will:

ensure that all government departments work towards a healthier wales by tackling the poverty that causes ill health;
produce a national capacity plan to employ and retain more doctors, nurses and beds;
press for adequate funding to meet wales’s greater needs;
seek alternatives to pfi and all other schemes aimed at ‘privatisation by stealth’;
reduce bureaucracy and the proliferation of structures that set up boundaries between agencies, particularly health, social services and the voluntary sector;
fund the provision of free home social care.
we will seek primary legislation to:

• enable the implementation of the recommendations of the royal commission on long term care for the elderly;
• to provide free eye tests and dental checks for all;
• to effect a ban on smoking in certain public buildings in wales.


glebelands care home in wokingham is one of the most impressive homes for older people in the county of berkshire. the care home provides highest quality residential care and nursing care in a beautiful setting. 

a stunning grade ii listed building set within its own beautiful and expansive grounds the home not only delivers exceptional residential and nursing care to its residents it also provides an exceptional quality of life and sense of well-being.

the location of the home exceeds all expectations, with rolling neatly trimmed meadows surrounded by wildlife filled woodlands the residents often wake up to bird song and views of roaming deer. 

despite this rural feel and sense of living deep within the countryside it is just a short walk from the heart of the charming market town of wokingham; ensuring many of the residents are frequent visitors to the tea shops and cafes which they enjoy with their loved ones or fellow residents and staff from the home.

glebelands care home in wokingham does not deliver care and support to those living with dementia instead focussing on providing exceptional residential and nursing care. the glebelands is well respected by local healthcare professionals, enjoying an excellent reputation and has a highly coveted “good” rating from the care quality commission; the home also enjoys a high degree of satisfaction from its residents and their loved ones.

the lifestyle of our residents is a key focus, which is why they only offer a full time activity programme but also a range of well–being activities such as hand and foot massages and aromatherapy. these have proved just as popular over the years with residents enjoying trips out, quizzes, wildlife interactions or film nights.

if you think that you or a loved one may soon need care pop in for a chat and find out what the greensleeves difference really is.
hospice care

the aim of hospice care is to improve the lives of people who have an incurable illness.

hospices provide care for people from the point at which their illness is diagnosed as terminal, to the end of their life, however long that may be. that doesn't mean hospice care needs to be continuous. people sometimes like to take a break from hospice care if their condition has become stable and they are feeling well.

hospice care places a high value on dignity, respect, and the wishes of the person who is ill, and aims to look after all their needs.

hospice care provides for medical, emotional, social, practical, psychological, and spiritual needs, plus the needs of the person’s family and carers. looking after all these aspects is often referred to as holistic care.

care also extends to those people who are close to the patient, and into the bereavement period after the patient has died.

where is hospice care provided?
most hospice care is provided in your own home, but it can also be provided in a care home, as an in-patient at the hospice itself, or as a day patient visiting the hospice. hospice care is a style of care, rather than something that takes place in a specific building. 

hospice teams include doctors, nurses, social workers, therapists, counsellors, and trained volunteers.  

hospices aim to feel more like a home than hospitals do. they can provide individual care more suited to the person who is approaching the end of life, in a gentler and calmer atmosphere than a hospital.

what does hospice care cover?
hospices vary, but your local hospice will offer medical and nursing care, including controlling pain and other symptoms. it may also offer: 

physiotherapy
occupational therapy
complementary therapies, such as massage 
rehabilitation (helping you build up your health and strength, such as through exercise)
respite care (giving your carers a break from caring for a while)
information about financial and other practical issues
bereavement care
spiritual and psychological help
most hospices will be happy to talk to you about what they can offer or show you around their facilities if you are considering hospice care. the staff can discuss any issues with you and answer questions.

when does hospice care start?
some people think that you only have hospice care when you are dying, but this is not true. a hospice palliative care team might help control symptoms such as pain or breathlessness early on in your illness, with you staying at the hospice for a few days before going home again.

or you might go into the hospice so that your family or carers can have a break from looking after you for a short while. this is called respite care.

some people have a number of periods of hospice care, depending on their condition and their wishes.

hospice care is free of charge. you can contact a hospice directly yourself, but the team will usually also ask for a referral from your doctor or nurse. hospice places are limited, but you can contact your local hospice to see what is available.

hospices are funded through a combination of nhs funding and public donations.

for an example of what hospice care is like, see life at the hospice of st francis.

how can i find a local hospice?
to find a local hospice:

you or your carer can ask your gp or district nurse
you can use the end of life care and hospices services search
you can contact hospice uk
you can use the find me help service on the dying matters website  
healthtalk.org has videos and written interviews of people talking about their experiences of hospice in-patient care and hospice day care.

read more about what you can expect from end of life care.

patients suffering from cancer are being offered the chance of a visit to a seaside retreat following the opening of a unique purpose-built hotel in bournemouth.

the grove offers patients and others with life-threatening illnesses the chance for respite and relaxation in an environment specially designed to combine the homely surroundings of a hotel with access to vital clinical care.

with nursing staff on hand, visitors and their families and carers can enjoy a week or two on the coast staying in modern accommodation just 100 yards from the clifftop and with access to a private beach hut, miles of golden sand and fleet of mobility scooters.

speaking to bbh , hotel manager, brenden howard, said: “several years ago the macmillan trust in christchurch sent some cancer patients to swanage for a holiday and it did them a lot of good. that sparked the idea for a purpose-built facility and the grove opened last year.


“we designed the facility to look like a hotel and not a hospital, with modern furniture and light, bright décor. all the bedrooms look out onto the local scenery, with garden views from the side rooms. there are also stunning grounds which people can walk around.

“one of the 30 en-suite bedrooms is fully accessible to the disabled and has an electric bed, reclining chair and a body dryer. two further bedrooms also have bathrooms that are dda compliant and suitable for wheelchair access, and all rooms have a pull chord in the bathroom and an emergency chord by the bed and residents can request additional aids such as boosted toilet seats. but, apart from these small additions, the rooms are otherwise similar to those you would find in any modern hotel.”

but, unlike most hotels, the availability of nursing advice and support means patients who would not otherwise be able to go on holiday can get the relaxation they need to aid their recovery.

howard said: “often when people are suffering from a terminal illness or in recovery they cannot go on holiday because they cannot get the support they may need and feel vulnerable and anxious in case something should happen. while providing a hotel-style environment, the grove has this vital clinical support, with nurses offering advice and help should patients need it. this is difficult to get in traditional holiday resorts.”

patients and their carers also get the chance to talk to others staying at the hotel, providing another important support network.

“people come for a week or two and they all love it,” said howard. “this is a unique facility and we want to help as many people as possible.”

the service is supported by macmillan caring locally, with rates for patients starting at £301 a week for a standard room and £350 a week for a superior room.

hospitals have been ordered to cancel non-urgent surgery amid fears that surging flu levels will see them deluged with patients over christmas and the new year.

the instructions from health officials came as new figures showed a near doubling in the number of patients facing long waits in ambulances.

two thirds of nhs trusts have now declared occupancy levels of at least 95 per cent - far above the recommended 85 per cent limit, amid rising cases of flu and norovirus.

gps have now been ordered to start prescribing antiviral drugs to care home residents and vulnerable hospital patients to prevent spread of the disease, as well as to treat flu in pensioners and those with health conditions.

–– advertisement ––




the latest nhs figures show almost 10,000 patients waiting in ambulances for at least one hour in the last month, with an 86 per cent rise in delays in the last fortnight.

in the last week, accident & emergency (a&e) turned patients away on 30 occasions, a rise from 25 such incidents the previous week.

officials yesterday issued orders to trusts to clear more space to deal with an expected surge in pressures, over the christmas period. hospitals have been told to stop carrying out non-urgent surgery and  to convert outpatient clinics into makeshift wards.

new figures show flu levels are rising, with the start of the season expected to be declared next week, while norovirus levels continue to increase, with a 14 per cent jump in the last week.

hospitals are already recording high levels of flu, with 23 confirmed cases in intensive care units, and eight flu-related deaths so far this season.

officials fear hospitals are too full to cope if patterns seen in australia - which had the worst flu season in two decades - are replicated here.

the decisions were taken by a meeting of the new nhs national emergency pressures panel, set up this year to monitor levels of strain on the service.

sir bruce keogh, nhs medical director said: “nhs staff are working flat out to cope with seasonal pressures and ensure patients receive the best possible care.

 

 


“however, given the scale of the challenge, hospitals should be planning for the surge that comes in the new year by freeing up beds and staff where they can to care for our sickest patients.”

trusts have been told to defer non-urgent operations until mid-january.

dr nick scriven, president of the society for acute medicine, said he believed cancellations could last up to six weeks longer. 

he said the decision to stop surgery was the right one, but said it was worrying that the measures were being taken without much actual unexpected stress on the system. 

“we have not yet seen anything out of the ordinary weather or infection-wise so my belief is that this stance will need to be extended until at least the end of february, he said. 

professor derek alderson, president of the royal college of surgeons, said: “no-one wants to have their surgery cancelled with less than 24 hours’ notice, yet this was the unacceptable experience for thousands of patients last winter.

“this guidance from nhs england will help to avoid a repeat of that situation and ensure finite hospital capacity is prioritised on patients in most need of help. however, we appreciate that this guidance still arrives at short notice for patients due to have their operation in the coming week.”

cancer operations and time-critical procedures should be prioritised, the advice states.

pauline philip, nhs national director for urgent and emergency care said: “we know that the nhs is about to enter into the most challenging part of the year with spikes in demand likely after the christmas and new year breaks.”

she urged the public to “play their part” by using pharmacies and nhs 111 when possible, and having flu jabs if eligible.

 

a survey has been launched asking the public whether they think the combined organisation should be called: colchester and ipswich nhs foundation trust, or east suffolk and north essex nhs foundation trust.

advertising

the choice is restricted by national nhs guidelines and these are the only two options up for consideration.

this title will only be used for the over-arching trust and both sites remain ipswich hospital and colchester general hospital.

bosses say they will take the views of staff, patients, partners, members of the public and supporters into account before deciding on the new name of the trust in the spring.

the mps for ipswich and colchester have both expressed no preference about the name, as long as the merger works for patients.

sandy martin, who represents ipswich, said: “i think whether it will be good for ipswich depends on what specialisms and services are in ipswich hospital, i don’t think the name enters into it.

“my meeting with the chief executive at ipswich hospital led me to believe that services for ipswich people will probably be better as a result of the merger.

“if it does go ahead, i will obviously be interested in what happens going forward to make sure that’s the case. if that is the case, i see no point in opposing the merger.”

colchester’s will quince shared similar views.

he said: “i’m broadly supportive of the merger, i think it’s working so far. of course we are keeping a watchful brief of it.

“the name of the trust is somewhat irrelevant because we are always going to have ipswich and colchester hospitals.

“the two trusts are right to recognise that they serve a much wider population, so i’m relatively relaxed about the name.”

one of the biggest changes to ipswich hospital highlighted by the survey is the fact it will become a foundation trust.

generally, foundation trusts are still part of the nhs and subject to the same standards, but they are free from central government control.

staff and patients have a greater say in the running of the hospital, and foundation trusts are led by a democratically elected board of governors.

colchester hospital became a foundation trust in 2008.

a detailed business case for the merger is currently being drawn up, with a final decision due to be made in june 2018.

not a day goes by when the nhs is not in the news in one way or another. often the stories are around an nhs under so much pressure, so short of staff or so short of beds that it cannot safely care for patients. that is why the nhs is making the news – because it is about life and death. something we all have a vested interest in.

i qualified in 1997 from sheffield university medical school and new labour had just been elected on a landslide. my patients then had to wait 12-18 months for life-saving heart bypass operations. patients died on the waiting list because they didn’t get their operation on time. by 2010, when new labour lost the election, my patients waited less than 18 weeks and received treatment so they could live a longer and healthier life.

my reason for explaining this is that politics does matter. politics has a huge impact on our day-to-day lives and voting is so important. asking our politicians difficult questions is important too. the news this week from an investigation by labour saying that 100,000 nhs posts lie vacant chimes many bells with my colleagues and i in the nhs.

uk news in pictures
52
show all
day to day we see empty gaps on rotas as there are not enough gps, junior doctors, consultants, nurses, radiographers and physios, along with many other roles, to do the work to look after patients. the knock-on effect of this is that waiting times increase and patients get frustrated at long queues in hospital clinics or surgeries.

staff are under such huge pressure, working flat out, that they become more and more demoralised and upset that they can’t properly do the job they were trained to do. some staff just can’t continue and throw the towel in – leaving the nhs many years earlier than they would have done if it had been properly looked after. their long experience is lost to the nhs and ultimately lost to the patients they would have looked after.

the spin and misinformation from the government is spewed forth on a daily basis and i don’t know any nhs worker who believes the likes of jeremy hunt or theresa may when they say “there are more doctors and nurses than ever before in the nhs” – the facts just do not back this up and show the usage of spin by government. in my own specialty of general practice, we are worryingly short of gps, with many surgeries one or two gps down, leaving those working to cover even more patients with subsequent stress levels rising considerably.

nhs england boss demands £350m-a-week promised by leave voters
we are woefully short of hospital beds, leaving patients stuck in a hospital car parks in the back of an ambulance. gp colleagues are having to wait longer and longer for ambulances for seriously ill patients in their surgeries as shown by recent social media messages from gps, which include the following:

“90-minute wait for ambulance for 36-week-old with sepsis. just don’t have the words”.

“we nearly ran out yesterday after a 3-hour wait. and had an asthmatic child who waited 6 hours. used all our oxygen when the ambo miraculously arrived”.

he flew his drone into strange hole in lake, but when he sees the footage
travelwhip
it was the most iconic line of all time, but he was never meant to say it at all
smartied
blind dog's reaction to surgery broke the internet
scribol
  by taboola sponsored links 
we also now see the emergence of a new role in hospitals – that of the “corridor nurse”. due to the ridiculous lack of beds (due to funding cuts) nurses now care for patients in corridors so that ambulances can leave for the next emergency. many members of the public are unaware of this because the government is keen to keep quiet about such gross failures on its part.

in 2018 let us hope the nhs receives the funding it deserves so that staff numbers can be increased to look after patients safely and in a timely fashion. it is incumbent on us all to challenge our mps on the true facts over the nhs and i urge you to do so via this very simple online system.

slashing queues, helping new mothers: nhs explores apps for care in a digital age
doctors, tech experts and scientists tested new ideas at a health ‘hackathon’ – now a fund aims to back the best with cash
 patients on trolleys wait for attention at an nhs a&e department.
 patients on trolleys wait for attention at an nhs a&e department. photograph: david sillitoe for the guardian
rachel ellis

sat 16 dec ‘17 20.30 gmt last modified on sat 16 dec ‘17 23.30 gmt
 view more sharing options
shares
151
comments
198
imagine if there were an app that reduced accident and emergency waiting times, ensured women are followed up after childbirth and even identified when hospital patients need to be transferred to intensive care.

these were some of the innovative ideas generated by more than 100 nhs doctors, dentists, technology developers, scientists and health economists at an unprecedented blue-sky thinking event that aimed to explore new possibilities in care in the digital age.

the task at the nhs ideas lab hackathon was to find 21st-century solutions to problems facing patients, doctors and the nhs. issues addressed included long waits for a&e, paper records that can get mislaid and lengthy processes that slow down patient care and increase the possibility of human error. a new innovation fund worth £100,000 has been set up to support some of the best ideas.


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
dr umar ahmad, an a&e doctor at the royal london hospital, was part of a team at the hackathon that came up with the idea of an app to speed up a&e waiting times. he said: “we need to streamline processes by using new technology, while at the same time maintaining high standards of patient care.

“in 15 years’ time artificial intelligence will be part of the nhs, but there are things we can do now to make our jobs a little bit easier and better for patients too.”

anaesthetist dr tim knowles, who also attended the event, added: “the technology is moving forward but we have hundreds of legacy systems. this means everything gets patched together with the electronic version of sellotape but it doesn’t work very well. clinicians have ideas about how to improve systems but the hackathon gave us the opportunity to find out realistically what is possible and understand how apps work.”

the hackathon, which took place in london last month, is the first to be organised by the pharmaceutical company boehringer ingelheim since becoming a sponsor this year of the nhs clinical entrepreneur programme, set up by nhs england and health education england two years ago to offer doctors and other health professionals the chance to develop their entrepreneurial aspirations while continuing to work in the nhs.

advertisement

professor tony young, national clinical lead for innovation at nhs england, said: “it was a remarkable success, and directly supports our programme to support clinical entrepreneurs, which offers opportunities for doctors and other health professionals to develop their innovative aspirations.

“we are committed to finding new ways to improve care so patients can directly benefit from the creativity and talent of our workforce.”

managed by the apperta foundation, a not-for-profit community interest company set up by health professionals in 2015 to improve technology in health and social care, the fund is open to social enterprises looking to improve health outcomes, address unmet needs and enhance the care and experience of patients with long-term conditions.

sabine nikolaus from boehringer ingelheim said: “by making the most of the intellectual capital in the nhs and technology sector, we can unearth new concepts which can make a difference to patients, the nhs and all those who deliver healthcare.

“we are thrilled with the ideas that emerged at the hackathon and can’t wait to see the best of these stand the chance of adoption in clinical practice.”

three ways to improve patient care
monitoring new mums

 a maternity ward at liverpool women's hospital.
facebook twitter pinterest
 a maternity ward at liverpool women’s hospital. photograph: sarah lee for the guardian
around a third of women will have an epidural – a local anaesthetic administered into the back – to relieve the pain of childbirth. although the treatment is very effective, there can be side-effects such as headache and nerve damage, so there should always be a follow-up before mothers are discharged from hospital. currently, there is no national system for this.

advertisement

according to anaesthetist dr tim knowles, in some cases notes about patients are simply written in a diary for the next shift for follow up, or entered on databases managed by individual doctors. “there are lots of points of failure in the system; you might forget to put the patient details in the book because you are so busy, which means that patient doesn’t exist in terms of follow-up, or the diary can get lost,” he said. “this means follow-up is variable and that’s a problem because we don’t want to miss a serious complication that we could have done something about.” to improve patient safety and generate useful patient data on complications, he and the epidural anaesthetics team came up with the idea of an app that stores all information about epidural follow-ups to a central dashboard using the ruby on rails server.

reducing a&e waiting times
lengthy waits for a&e are commonplace in the nhs. with two million patients going through the system each month, the nhs target of treating 95% of patients within four hours has not been met since 2015.

according to dr umar ahmad, an a&e doctor at the royal london hospital, part of the problem is the delay getting medical test results back: it takes a lab about an hour to process a blood test. he and his team came up with the idea of an app that identifies which tests a patient needs as soon as they arrive in a&e.

the algorithm generates a barcode that the patient can scan using their mobile phone and this directs them to the right part of the a&e department to get tests done. the idea is that, by the time their turn comes, doctors have all the information they need to make a diagnosis. “it can take an hour-and-a-half or even longer for patients who are not immediately sick just to find out which tests they need to have done,” said dr ahmad. “if tests are done early, by the time the patient sees the doctor they will have the information they need to make a diagnosis, admit a patient to hospital or refer to a specialist.

“even if we could apply this approach to 20% of a&e patients, it would have a huge effect on waiting times as well as helping medical staff.”

early warning for deteriorating patients
when patients in hospital take a turn for the worse, their condition should be picked up by the national early warning score (news) system. however, this mostly paper-based system relies on patients’ observations and the news score being correctly calculated, and then finding appropriate medical staff.

according to anaesthetist dr jakob mathiszig-lee, even if every stage is carried out correctly, it can take more than an hour to get deteriorating patients to critical care.

“identifying patients who are deteriorating from sepsis and other serious conditions and then flagging it up appropriately is a problem in the uk,” explained mathiszig-lee. “there are cases when by the time i get told about a patient, their condition is irretrievable.”

he and his team came up with the idea of vitalflag – a real-time text alert system to warn critical care staff directly that a patient is deteriorating.

“our idea was to find a way to speed up the process,” he said, “going directly from entering the patient’s data to flagging it up with the critical care team.”

members of lowestoft coalition against the cuts (lcac) gathered for a public meeting on december 4, to discuss the sustainability and transformation plan (stp), which would see the various arms of norfolk and waveney’s nhs work more closely with local councils and other organisations.

the plan, which would see the relevant changes made by 2021, includes explanations for how the nhs would make use of its resources as efficiently as possible.

among the measures pledged is the provision of more services in general practice and communities so that hospitals can focus on specialist and emergency care, as well as further integrating health and social care so that people can receive coordinated support at home where possible.

in attendance at the waveney tuc-supported meeting was bill adnams, a long-time campaigner on nhs issues and member of the keep our nhs public group.

mr adnams stated that this latest nhs reorganisation was difficult to understand, but one that is “about cuts to services and privatisation.”

he said: “the stps determine that the nhs will have to survive in a market system alongside private companies.

“the last nhs reforms - closing hospitals and selling them off - didn’t work. ‘care in the community’ was just a slogan and the result has been neither better nor cheaper.”

the meeting also saw frank joyce, secretary of lcac, questioning the way the stp was introduced. he said: “why has there been no explanation or apology for the cuts, mismanagement and suffering caused by the last reorganisation?

“to embark on another costly and disruptive reorganisation is insane.”

the new vision for norfolk and waveney includes a desire to help the region’s three main hospitals to become more sustainable by working more closely together, while there will be better utilisation of technology with consultations via skype or facetime.

a spokesman for the stp said: “the plan focuses on helping individuals to stay as healthy as possible while supporting more people – especially those with long-term conditions – to live independently at home. it sets out the changes which will manage demand while making sure everyone can access high quality services which meet their needs.”

this countdown of those we count on will focus on a different person or individual every day up until christmas, celebrating our healthcare heroes.

christine hawkins, matron for palliative care, norfolk community health and care trust (nchc)

christine has worked within the nhs for 40 years plus and has always put patients at the centre, dedicating her nursing career to improving patients’ and families’ experiences. 

advertising


she has worked within inpatients, community, walk-in centre, prison service and recently her later years have been working within palliative care where she has played a leading role in developing the palliative care services whilst working with key stakeholders to grow the service.

she will spend time talking and supporting staff, empowering them to grow. christine is a leader, a clinician a manager, and above all a nurse who has dedicated her career to enriching the lives of patients, their families, and enabling staff to grow in their chosen health care field.

one week into winter and health service pressures have been deemed “simply unsafe” by experts, after the first instalment of the nhs’s weekly winter progress report.

around one in 20 hospital beds (5.5 per cent) in england are available as the nhs heads towards christmas, posing major questions about its ability to respond as seasonal pressures increase.

the nhs confederation, which represents organisations across the health service, said the figures “tell a very alarming story at this stage in winter – hospitals are nearly full”.

advertising

inread invented by teads
read more
nhs ‘sleepwalking into winter crisis’ as waiting times soar
nhs needs £500m bailout to cope with coming winter crisis, says labour
hospitals across uk cancelling ‘urgent’ cancer ops amid nhs crisis
the figures come from nhs england’s first weekly winter operational update of the year, a run down of how the service is coping; including flu related deaths, ambulance delays, and beds quarantined in outbreaks of diarrhoea and vomiting.

nhs england wrote to trusts in july with directives for this winter that said bed occupancy nationally should not exceed an average of 92 per cent.

but the standard used by experts, and set out in an earlier national audit office review on hospital demand, has said that trusts with occupancy regularly over 85 per cent risk “bed crises” and greater levels of hospital-acquired infections.

what happened to susan boyle?
thebrofessional.net
it was the most iconic line of all time, but he was never meant to say it at all
smartied
the henry viii quiz: will you score higher than average?
howstuffworks
  by taboola sponsored links 
the fact that the nhs is already exceeding both targets nationally is cause for concern, but quarterly data, published in september and broken down by trust, shows four areas were already running at more than 98 per cent capacity.

this is despite a £1bn government investment in social care provided in the spring budget to speed up the discharge of patients from hospital into the community.

high bed occupancy is a particular concern with the nhs on high alert for a particularly bad bout of winter flu, after hospitals in australia and new zealand dealt with record numbers of cases during their winter season.

doctors’ leaders said today that a sudden cold snap could mean the system “would really struggle”.

advertising

inread invented by teads
however nhs trust representative body, nhs providers, said the extra effort put into winter preparations earlier this year had helped, even though performance is running roughly similar to last year.

the labour party focused on the delays in ambulances being able to handover patients to hospitals, warning that the nhs faces a “winter of misery” with more than 10,000 patients waiting at least 30 minutes outside a&es last week.

a fifth of these waits lasted more than an hour.


read more
the nhs is about to ration its services due to lack of funding
this is despite the nhs writing to trusts warning that delayed handovers between ambulances and a&es would be a national priority to prevent a repeat of last year’s record waits.

a fortnight ago chancellor philip hammond awarded the nhs £335m “for pressures this winter” in the autumn budget, despite nhs england chief executive simon stevens asking for the £350m a week pledged by brexit campaigners.

nhs confederation chief executive niall dickson said of the figures: “this level of system pressure is quite simply unsafe and is putting patients at risk.

“there is a real human cost here. on two days in november there was only one paediatric intensive care unit bed available in the whole of london.

“parents who have spent months preparing their children for urgent operations are turning up at hospital only to be told they have been cancelled.”

chris hopson, chief executive of nhs providers said their winter plans are “being put to the test” but the early preparation was paying off.


nhs england boss demands £350m-a-week promised by leave voters
“it is very early days but it is clearly a concern that bed occupancy – with an average rate of 94.5 per cent – is already running so high as we head into what is usually the busiest time of the year.

“most indicators that can be compared to last year suggest that we are in a similar – or slightly better – position than at the same stage last year.

“this is welcome and shows that, given demand is growing, the amount of preparation ahead of winter undertaken by nhs trusts and national bodies is already proving helpful.”

an nhs england spokesperson said: “the nhs has prepared for winter this year more intensely than ever before, developing robust plans to manage expected increased pressures, as well as create contingency plans to cover exceptional surges in demand.” 

screaming blue murder: we join a london ambulance crew for the busiest nightshift of the year
4
show all
they added that the public should ensure they have had their flu vaccinations and turn to services like the nhs 111 helpline for non-urgent medical advice.

labour shadow health secretary jonathan ashworth said: “after an inadequate budget for the nhs, healthcare leaders warned of an imminent and unprecedented winter crisis.

“today’s data reveals a stark picture of what lies ahead: a winter of misery for patients and unparalleled pressures on our nhs staff.”

british medical association chair, dr chaand nagpaul, said: “these figures show a service under huge pressure with little or no spare capacity as the nhs approaches its busiest time of the year.

“the concern is that that if there is a serious flu outbreak or cold snap the system would really struggle to deal with a spike in demand.”


nhs bosses have been accused of unacceptable secrecy after deciding no longer to reveal how many hospitals come under such pressure during winter that they have to declare an alert.

nhs england will not publish this winter’s figures for the number of trusts forced to issue an alert under the operational pressures escalation levels (opel) framework system.

the disclosure last winter that dozens of nhs trusts in england had to issue black alerts – signalling they could not cope with a surge in demand for care – received widespread media coverage. conditions in hospitals became so stretched last january that the british red cross called it a humanitarian crisis.


nhs bosses sound alarm over hospitals already running at 99% capacity
 read more
the shadow health secretary, jonathan ashworth, said: “it is entirely unacceptable that the true extent of the crisis may not be fully revealed because of a failure to publish details of which trusts have been forced to issue alerts. ministers must be held accountable for their appalling failure to properly fund our nhs as it heads into another difficult winter.”

the liberal democrat mp norman lamb, a health minister in the 2010-15 coalition government, said any cover-up by the government over nhs performance would be “a real scandal”.

lamb said: “there are serious questions as to why figures on trusts under pressure appears to have been dropped from the latest batch of data. it would be a real scandal if the government is trying to cover-up evidence that the nhs is under unsustainable pressure. we need to know immediately when these figures will be made available.”

the guardian has asked both nhs england and the department of health who was involved in the decision and to answer the accusation of burying bad news.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



england’s 153 nhs acute hospital trusts are still using the opel system, which can lead to a hospital shutting its a&e temporarily or sending ambulances elsewhere, or to it receiving extra help.

the change in policy emerged on thursday when nhs england issued the first set of weekly figures showing how hospitals are performing this winter.

in an accompanying statement it defended the decision, saying it was publishing more data this year than in previous winters. “the nhs nationally has introduced a new system this year for identifying, and acting upon, heightened operational pressures over winter,” it said. “this is centred around the new national emergency pressures panel, chaired by sir bruce keogh, and its decisions about raising, or reducing, their assessments of pressure will be made transparently and published.”

the figures show that 10,184 people had to wait at least half an hour in the back of an ambulance last week because a&e units were so busy. under new nhs rules, hospitals are supposed to ensure such delays never happen.

between 27 november and 3 december, 8,340 people waited in an ambulance for 30-60 minutes and another 1,844 waited for more than an hour.

ashworth said the figures “reveal the dire impact tory underfunding is already having on thousands of patients unable to promptly access a&e departments right across the country. some trusts are already completely full with no spare beds, an extremely worrying indicator for what is still to come.”


labour demands commons vote on 'secret' plan for nhs
 read more
nhs england and nhs improvement wrote to all 240 nhs trusts in england on 7 november telling them to ensure no patient ended up being cared for in a corridor or having to wait 12 hours on a trolley to be admitted this winter.

they also made clear that acute hospitals should prepare their a&e units so that “patients do not wait more than 15 minutes in ambulances before being handed over to the hospital”. trust bosses denounced the regulators’ approach as “barking mad” and unrealistic, given the intense pressures hospitals are under.

the figures also show that hospitals in england were 94.5% full last week – far over the 85% limit that is regarded as the maximum in order to ensure safety.

“it is very early days but it is clearly a concern that bed occupancy – with an average rate of 94.5% – is already running so high as we head into what into what is usually the busiest time of year”, said chris hopson, the chief executive of nhs providers, which represents hospitals.

the royal college of nursing said the figures “make depressing reading for both patients and staff”.

“having so few free beds also means it’s far more difficult to admit patients to the right ward for their condition”, said janet davies, the union’s chief executive.

the figures also show:

a&e units at five different nhs trusts were so busy they had to temporarily divert patients to a nearby hospital last week. manchester university and gloucestershire hospitals nhs trusts did that three times each.
an average of 790 beds, both occupied and unoccupied, were shut each day because of an outbreak of norovirus, the diarrhoea and vomiting bug.
no a&e unit had to close completely because it could not cope with a surge in demand from patients needing care.
an nhs england spokesperson said: “the nhs has prepared for winter this year more intensely than ever before, developing robust plans to manage expected increased pressures, as well as create contingency plans to cover exceptional surges in demand.”

unexpected deaths and safety fears in private hospitals should be made more transparent for patients in order to prevent more cases like that of the rogue surgeon ian paterson, the royal college of surgeons has said.

the college called for a review of safety standards in the private sector after it emerged that paterson – who was convicted last month of unlawfully wounding private patients by carrying out needless operations – was allowed to continue working as a surgeon for more than a decade despite concerns being raised about his practices.

in an letter to the government, the rcs said private healthcare patients had less information about safety concerns in privately run hospitals than those in the nhs.

in april a jury at nottingham crown court found paterson guilty of 17 counts of wounding with intent and three of unlawful wounding. paterson carried out thousands of needless breast operations on patients who trusted his “brilliant bedside manner”.


ian paterson: the 'likeable' breast surgeon who wounded his patients
 read more
“the ian paterson case raises the question of how standards of practice, consent and patient safety are assured, particularly in the private sector where many of his patients were treated. in particular there is a question about the data available from private hospitals,” the letter states. 

the body welcomed jeremy hunt’s call for an inquiry into how paterson was able to practise for so long. the letter adds: “in particular we need to ask how and why those working closely with ian paterson did not spot his behaviour or were unwilling to challenge it. we will continue to support a culture in the health service which encourages staff to speak up.”

the private sector should be forced to report similar patient safety data as the nhs, including unexpected deaths and serious injuries, said the surgeons. they said private hospitals should report “never events” – mistakes so serious they should never happen – in the same way as nhs hospitals.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



they also called for new legislation to better regulate cosmetic surgery to ensure surgeons are property qualified.

clare marx, the president of the rcs, said: “ian paterson wilfully abused the trust placed in him by patients at their most vulnerable. his actions and behaviour were appalling and we must do everything in our power to prevent such a violation being repeated.”

she stressed that the “overwhelming majority” of doctors worked with “diligence and commitment” and modern medical practice meant rogue doctors were more likely to be identified than in the past. but she added: “there are still a number of areas which require urgent improvements to protect patients from harm. robust regulation remains an important way of protecting the public.”

paterson is due to be sentenced at nottingham crown court this month.

nhs lothian has recorded the worst performance for a&e waiting time targets since the publication of weekly figures began almost three years ago.

the collapse in its figures follows an admission its acute hospitals had previously under-reported waits.

in the latest weekly figures, just 77.3% of patients were dealt with within the four-hour target.

before the misreporting came to light in october the health board had been meeting the government's target of 95%.

at the beginning of 2015, the scottish government began publishing a&e waiting times every week as a response to concerns about poor performance in some health boards.

bbc research published last week showed that over the past three years scotland's a&e departments were the best performing anywhere in the uk.

breached guidelines
it showed that scotland had maintained its performance as england's figures had slumped.

however, a question mark was raised over how nhs lothian reported its figures and it was found to have breached guidelines.

the health board has now recorded the worst figures for a health board since weekly reporting was brought in.

it missed the four-hour target for almost a quarter of all patients attending a&e.

the royal infirmary of edinburgh had the poorest performance of any hospital in scotland, seeing less than two-thirds (64.1%) of patients on time. lothian's other general a&e fared better at 86.6%.

overall, scotland's accident and emergency departments recorded their worst performance since march 2015.

the figures for the week ending 10 december showed that 86.9% of patients were dealt with within four hours.

nhs forth valley (83.4%) and nhs greater glasgow and clyde (84.9%) reported figures well below the 95% target.

winter pressures
health secretary shona robison said outbreaks of flu and slips and trips because of black ice had led to extra pressure on hospitals in recent weeks.

she said the scottish government was working with nhs lothian to help tackle waiting times and delayed discharges at the royal infirmary of edinburgh (rie) by helping identify specific issues and providing solutions.

nhs lothian's deputy chief executive, jim crombie, said: like a number of other health boards, nhs lothian is experiencing significant winter pressures across our whole healthcare system.

there are a number of contributing factors, including the increasing complexity of cases presenting at emergency departments and significant numbers of delayed discharges.

this new way of working will allow us to zoom in on processes and procedures, not just in the emergency department, but across the acute care system to help improve patient flow through our hospitals.

fewer patients in scotland are waiting longer than four hours in a&e than they did in 2012/3 in contrast to england where the number has more than doubled, according to new research by the bbc.

it found england had a 155% rise in long waits between 2012/3 and this year, up to 2.5 million a year.

hospitals in wales and northern ireland also saw an increase over the period.

in scotland, the number of patients waiting more than four hours fell by 9% to just over 100,000.

long a&e waits double in four years
nhs waits for cancer care, a&e and ops worsen across uk
nhs lothian a&e waiting times have been under-reported
the statistics show the total number of visits to accident and emergency departments in scotland increased slightly to 1,629,426 in the year to november.

chart
nhs targets give hospitals four hours in which to treat and discharge or admit or transfer a patient.

they are expected to do that in 95% of cases.


if you can't see the nhs tracker, click or tap here.

presentational grey line
scottish a&es were the closest of the uk nations to hitting the 95% target, managing to deal with 93.9% of cases within four hours - up from 93.2% in 2012/3.

in england, there were almost 1.7 million more patients attending a&e than four years ago, a rise of 7.8%.

only 136,364 extra were treated within the four-hour target, meaning almost 1.6 million more patients were outside the limit.

as a consequence, england went from meeting the 95% target in 2012-13 to reaching just 89.1% in the latest data.

some english regions were closer to the 95% target, such as the north east with 94.4%.

wales was already missing the waiting time target in 2012/13, seeing 89.1% of patients within four hours. this fell to 82.6% in 2016/17.

northern ireland was also already missing the waiting time target in 2012/13, seeing 77.6% of patients within four hours across the period. this fell further to 75.6% in the latest 12 months.

the scottish government said scotland's higher level of performance was partly due to the six essential actions programme, designed to share best practice in the nhs.

health secretary shona robison added: we've also provided £30m additional investment over the three years of this programme that has supported the appointment of dedicated national and local teams to focus on improving patient flow, ensuring that once people arrive into a&e, they can be admitted or transferred in a timely way.

this has been enhanced by additional winter investment each year to support resilience across nhs scotland - with an additional £5m to support resilience across health and social care services this winter.

presentational grey line
analysis by shelley jofre, bbc scotland health correspondent

hospital wardimage copyrightpa
health secretary shona robison often proclaims scotland's a&e departments are the best performing anywhere in the uk. these new figures certainly seem to back that up.

since 2013 the number of patients seen within four hours has risen slightly, while the number waiting longer is down nearly 9%. contrast with england, which has seen a dramatic 155% rise in people waiting longer than the target time.

so what explains the big difference? england's population has grown faster than scotland's in the last four years (3.3% compared to 1.7%) so that's one reason. but it clearly doesn't tell the whole story.

while scotland faces the same problems in recruiting family doctors as the rest of the uk, it has more gps per head of population than the rest of the uk.

intriguingly, this research shows the number of a&e admissions has barely changed in scotland over four years, while in england it's risen by nearly 8%. it could be that if patients in scotland find it easier to get a gp appointment, fewer of them end up in a&e with minor ailments.

the nuffield trust health charity says the difference north and south of the border could also, in part, be explained by lower spending on social care in england and a continuing problem there with delayed discharges from hospital.

its research suggests it's not about how many people attend a&e but about difficulties in admitting people when the main hospital is full. in england, the proportion of hospital beds occupied on average is higher than in scotland.

the scottish government puts its a&e performance down to a tight focus in recent years on making sure patients are admitted or transferred in a timely way, backed up by an extra £30m of investment.

even so, the research shows on the two 12-month periods studied scotland still fell short of the target of seeing 95% of people within four hours.

and of course it comes in the week it was revealed a&e waiting times have been routinely under-reported in lothian and prof sir harry burns said it wouldn't surprise him if the massaging of waiting time figures in the nhs was common.

health secretary shona robison has ordered an independent review into how waiting times are recorded at st john's hospital in livingston.

concerns about the hospital's a&e department were raised by a whistleblower in october.

following an immediate nhs lothian investigation, ordered by ms robison, areas of concern were found.

nhs lothian said it was encouraged that staff had felt able to raise concerns about the hospital.

ms robison has now asked the scottish academy of medical royal colleges to carry out an external review.

nhs lothian said staff at the a&e unit had been applying locally produced guidelines for recording patients who have to wait for more than four hours.

these local practices did not comply with national guidance.

'serious allegations'
the internal investigation report said: local procedures were drafted with the best of intentions of clarifying to staff when a patient has, or has not, breached the four-hour access target.

according to nhs lothian, this meant some patients who may have been recorded as breaching the waiting time performance target, were not included in departmental performance reports.

the independent inquiry will be led by prof derek bell.

the health secretary said: these are serious allegations and the early findings are clearly a cause for concern.

that is why i have asked prof bell to lead an independent review of these allegations.

we are working very closely with the board to ensure that lessons are learned from the investigation and recommendations made are fully implemented as soon as possible and shared across nhs scotland.

nhs lothian has promised to fully cooperate with the independent inquiry.

'clear assurances'
deputy chief executive jim crombie said: we actively encourage our staff in nhs lothian to highlight issues relating to patient safety and we take any allegations of misconduct or wrongdoing very seriously.

we have a robust whistleblowing policy in place to ensure that all our staff are supported and feel able to raise any concerns and i am encouraged that staff are able to discuss them.

as soon as we received these concerns, an internal audit team was appointed, headed by a senior non-executive director to oversee the investigation and get to the bottom of the concerns.

lothian msp and scottish conservatives health spokesman miles briggs said: the concerns about how a&e waiting times are recorded at st john's are extremely serious and alarming and therefore it is right that the scottish government has ordered an independent inquiry into the allegations.

i hope that this independent review will be completed as thoroughly as possible and also without delay. if the review recommends that changes are needed in the system at st john's then these must also be implemented immediately and nhs lothian and scottish ministers need to ensure this takes place.

west lothian residents will be looking for very clear reassurances that the current system of recording a&e waiting times at the local hospital so many of them rely on has not been designed to minimise or mask excessive waits that break the scottish government's four-hour target.

scottish labour's health spokesman anas sarwar said: these are deeply troubling findings that will concern patients across nhs lothian and beyond.

it is absolutely right that they are independently investigated. but the reality is snp mismanagement has left nhs staff across scotland over-worked, under-valued and under-resourced.

geoff mann is about to mark 10 years as a volunteer at north tyneside general hospital. the retired chartered quantity surveyor does a day a week, sometimes more, driving patients and visitors with mobility needs around the hospital in north shields in an electric buggy.

“it’s what everybody says – the enormous sense of satisfaction,” says mann, 77, when asked what he gets out of it. “you meet a lot of people, you help them get around, you put them at ease if they’re worried – and you feel you’re part of one big family.”


eleanor smith mp: ‘nhs staff are undervalued – and demoralised’
 read more
for michael hume, another driver, volunteering for almost four years now has helped him regain confidence after a serious accident. “i wasn’t good in big groups,” says the 52-year-old former forklift operator. “this has picked me up more than anything.”

north tyneside is run by northumbria healthcare nhs foundation trust, one of five trusts in a pilot programme endorsed and funded by nhs england (nhse) aiming to make volunteering an integral part of healthcare. although volunteers have been a feature of the nhs since its inception, their roles have typically been limited to running the hospital shop or pushing a trolley around the wards.

this is different. “generally there’s a lot of ‘nice’ stuff. but is it high impact? no – it’s at the margins,” says sir tom hughes-hallett, the philanthropist behind the programme. “i thought we could really shift the dial on this, recast volunteering for the 21st century and help the nhs more effectively tackle the ever-mounting health challenges it faces.”

the plan, which has the backing of nhs leaders and an impressive line-up of charity and corporate supporters, is to use volunteers to ease “pinch points” in the patient’s progress through the healthcare system – from the queue at a hospital reception or delays in discharge caused by lack of transport to making someone available to collect prescriptions from the hospital pharmacy. they could also be part of wards, meeting patient needs that paid staff have no time to address.

even three years ago, staff at my trust didn’t know what to do with volunteers. but now they are bursting with ideas

hughes-hallett has set up a non-profit community interest company, helpforce, to develop the pilot programme and to coordinate and grow volunteering initiatives across the nhs in england. in all, 12 trusts – including the five in the pilot – have joined an initial network supporting the broader ambition to double the number of volunteers in hospitals from an estimated 78,000 to more than 150,000 by 2021.

“that will give the nhs one volunteer for every 10 staff,” says hughes-hallett, who chairs the chelsea and westminster hospital foundation trust in west london, another of the pilot sites. “i think that will make a huge difference to the stress and exhaustion of the workforce.”

it is precisely that exhaustion, after seven years of austerity and growing pressure on the nhs to meet the needs of the ageing population, that makes him optimistic about his plan. health workers, and especially their trade unions, have traditionally been suspicious of volunteers encroaching on professional roles.

but now the prospect of having extra pairs of hands is revealing a very different attitude, he reports. at his own trust, staff are “biting our hands off” to add volunteers to their teams. “even three years ago they would have said, ‘what are we going do with them?’ now they are bursting with ideas. it’s totally changed.”


key to this new attitude is likely to be helpforce’s guarantee that volunteers will never replace staff – “i have made that absolute commitment to the unions,” says hughes-hallett – and its ambition that they will always be safe and reliable. it is working with health education england, the health sector training body, on the idea of certified courses for volunteers. the pilot sites, moreover, are required to involve local staff representatives in creating volunteer roles. “unless this is something that the unions think is going to benefit their members, it isn’t going to work,” hughes-hallett declares.

hughes-hallett describes the royal college of nursing as “very supportive” and has invited it to join the helpforce advisory council. at public services union unison, head of health, sara gorton, expresses support for the principle of volunteering, but adds: “unison is keen to work with helpforce to ensure that the role of volunteers is limited to tasks that don’t compromise patient safety or take paid staff away from their core work.”


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
hughes-hallett, 63, was a successful investment banker who sold his business in 2000 and became chief executive of cancer care charity marie curie. it was during his 12 years there that he came to appreciate the value and potential of volunteers. in summer last year, he pitched the helpforce blueprint to health service leaders including nhs chief executive, simon stevens, who endorsed it.

the pilot programme, which also includes sandwell and west birmingham hospitals trust, university hospital southampton foundation trust and west suffolk foundation trust, is being funded by £250,000 from nhs england. hughes-hallett says he has put in a sum “in the low six figures” and a bid has been made for lottery funding, an undisclosed sum, for the four-strong central team working alongside him.

among helpforce’s supporting organisations is the royal voluntary service (rvs), which already provides some 5,000 volunteers for hospitals across britain. catherine johnstone, rvs chief executive, says: “we’ve been there a long time, we have a big footprint – but the complexity of the challenges now facing hospitals means we have to pull together and have more focus. without a national initiative like this, that’s very difficult.”

helpforce is also looking to recruit a more diverse volunteer base than groups like rvs have been able to do. georgia hutton, 28, has been volunteering as a “meeter and greeter” at north tyneside for more than five years, but admits she is unusual in having decided to try it after graduating from university without firm career plans.

“i don’t know why more young people don’t do it: i think it’s great,” says hutton, who is also training to be a counsellor and working part-time as a receptionist. “a lot of the people who come in are elderly, and maybe have no one else at home, so sometimes i just sit and have a little chat with them.”

hutton chooses to volunteer one afternoon a fortnight. at chelsea and westminster, katie lillie, 38, helps out on the busy main reception between 10am and 2pm on wednesdays, which fits in with her children’s school hours. offering such flexibility will be crucial to attracting younger volunteers and those from more diverse ethnic backgrounds, the helpforce team recognises, but can you match people’s preferences with those “pinch points” in the system?

 how the voluntary sector can save an overstretched nhs
paul woodward
 read more
rachael allsop, chelsea and westminster’s director of volunteering, thinks you can. helping patients eat and drink at lunchtime is critical to their speedy recovery, she points out, while weekends in hospital “can be desperate” if there are no activities. “bridging the gap between late afternoon and usual visiting time is another great opportunity for younger volunteers, including students looking to have it on their cv,” she says.

allsop has a target of increasing the number of volunteers at chelsea and westminster from 350 to 900 by 2020. that looks daunting, but hughes-hallett is convinced the tide is running strongly in helpforce’s favour. “it’s already been the most extraordinary journey,” he says. “i don’t think i’ve ever done anything more exciting in my life.”

stephen hawking has reignited his public dispute with jeremy hunt by joining a legal action aimed at scuppering an nhs shake-up that he fears will lead to greater privatisation and rationing of resources.

the physicist has become a party to a lawsuit that is seeking to stop the introduction of the first accountable care organisations (acos) into the nhs in england in april.

“i am concerned that accountable care organisations are an attack on the fundamental principles of the nhs,” hawking told the guardian, explaining his move.

 these little-known opaque bodies could run health services. are they legal?
denis campbell
 read more
“they have not been established by statute, and they appear to be being used for reducing public expenditure, for cutting services and for allowing private companies to receive and benefit from significant sums of public money for organising and providing services.”

acos have aroused suspicion among labour mps and nhs campaigners because they are modelled on organisations of the same name that play a key role in healthcare in some parts of the us.

hawking and hunt became embroiled in a war of words in august after hawking used a guardian article to accuse the conservatives of causing the nhs’s difficulties by underfunding it and hunt of “cherrypicking” and misrepresenting research findings to suit his arguments.

hunt claimed on twitter and in a newspaper piece that hawking, a “personal hero” to him, had wrongly claimed that the nhs was heading towards a “us-style insurance system”, saying there was no evidence to back this up.

 jeremy hunt at downing street this week
facebook twitter pinterest
 jeremy hunt at downing street this week. photograph: andy rain/epa
hawking has become a “proposed claimant” alongside four academics and nhs campaigners, known as the judicial review group. they hope high court judges will grant them a judicial review to stop hunt and nhs england bringing in acos without the move first being subjected to public consultation and scrutiny by parliament.

“i am joining this legal action because the nhs is being taken in a direction which i oppose, as i stated in august, without proper public and parliamentary scrutiny, consultations and debate,” said hawking.

“i want the attention of the people of england to be drawn to what is happening and for those who are entrusted with responsibility for the nhs to account openly for themselves in public, and to be judged accordingly.”

 jeremy hunt can attack me all he wants – but he is wrong to say the nhs is working
stephen hawking
 read more
the intervention will focus attention on acos, which have so far generated little media coverage or political interest. they have been promoted by simon stevens, the chief executive of nhs england, and backed by the government, as a key part of his five year forward view blueprint to modernise the nhs and help it stay within budget.

nhs england says acos are simply a new way of ensuring that different types of health service bodies can work together, and with providers of social care services, in an area to integrate care to benefit patients’ health. but those behind the legal challenge fear acos could ultimately gain control of budgets worth billions of pounds and restrict access to care in order to avoid overshooting their budgets.

advertisement

prof sir bruce keogh, nhs england’s medical director, has claimed acos will end unhelpful fractures between different services and stop patients being “passed from pillar to post”. but he has recognised the difficulty of trying to persuade the public of their benefits.

allyson pollock, a professor of public health and one of the four people who instigated the legal action in october, said: “we are honoured and delighted that prof stephen hawking, who cares so deeply about the nhs, is joining this legal action. the full details of these acos must be published and consulted on before they progress any further. this should be the first rule of good and transparent administration for the nhs.”

she added: “if jeremy hunt and simon stevens won’t budge, then this is the moment that everybody needs to come together and say clearly that the nhs is ours, and that we are going to fight to keep it that way.”

the department of health said: “we strongly resist the misleading claims in this action; it is irresponsible scaremongering to suggest that accountable care organisations are being used to support privatisation and harm the fundamental principles of the nhs.

“the nhs will remain a taxpayer-funded system free at the point of use; acos are simply about making care more joined-up between different health and care organisations.”

hospitals are being turned into long-stay institutions, amid a crisis in social care, with more than 17,000 people now stuck on hospital wards for at least three weeks, official figures show.

the nhs figures show that across the country, bed occupancy levels are already approaching 95 per cent, with 18 hospital trusts reaching 100 per cent capacity last week.

the new data - the first ever analysis of the numbers stuck in hospital for such periods - shows the number of “long stay patients” already rising as winter sets in.

nhs trust chief executives said pensioners admitted to wards with relatively minor health problems were ending up dispatched to care homes, weeks later, because they had lost so much mobility while trapped needlessly.

–– advertisement ––




in many cases, elderly people were ending up in such institutions when they could have left hospital weeks earlier, if only they had been given help at home, they said.

the statistics show some nhs trusts with hundreds of “long stay” patients, with more than 500 such cases at leeds teaching hospitals trust, and more than 480 at barts health trust in london.

they also show 20,000 ambulance delays in the last fortnight, prompting labour to warn of a “winter of misery” ahead.

one nhs trust chief executive said lack of social care meant far too many “long stay” patients were stuck in hospital for lack of help at home, rather than medical need.

“at any one time, i’ve got 250 beds full of people staying longer than 20 days, mainly people who are elderly,” she said, warning that far too many cases were there for lack of social care.

nhs trusts were focussing their efforts on trying to get short stay patients out even quicker, she said, because the problem of long stays was so intractable.

even an extra week in hospital for want of care at home could have devastating consequences, another said, with a patient who could have lived independently ending up in a care home.

“at first, a patient is well enough to be discharged, as long as they get a care package. then they stay a week longer and they need a care home, another week and they need a nursing home,” said a second trust chief executive, speaking on condition of anonymity.

chris hopson, chief executive of nhs providers, which represents hospital trusts, said: “we know that a lot of trusts have patients who are ready to be discharged but can not leave because there isn’t suitable care available. some say recent care-home closures have made the problem even more difficult.

why is the nhs under so much pressure?
an ageing population. there are one million more people over the age of 65 than five years ago. this has caused a surge in demand for medical care

cuts to budgets for social care. while the nhs budget has been protected, social services for home helps and other care have fallen by 11 per cent in five years. this has caused record levels of “bedblocking”; people with no medical need to be in hospital are stuck there because they can’t be supported at home

staff shortages. while hospital doctor and nurse numbers have risen over the last decade, they have not kept pace with the rise in demand. meanwhile 2016 saw record numbers of gp practices close, displacing patients on to a&e departments as they seek medical advice

lifestyle factors. drinking too much alcohol, smoking, a poor diet with not enough fruit and vegetables and not doing enough exercise are all major reasons for becoming unwell and needing to rely on our health services. growing numbers of overweight children show this problem is currently set to continue.

organisations. photograph: niklas halle'n/afp/getty images
fri 15 dec ‘17 13.48 gmt last modified on fri 15 dec ‘17 14.41 gmt
 view more sharing options
shares
81
comments
52
the war over the future of the nhs is being fought on multiple fronts. campaigners, the labour party, the government, nhs england and even stephen hawking are locked in combat over the structure, funding, transparency, accountability and legality of the current wave of reforms, along with the never-ending fight about privatisation – real or imagined.

the famous physicist has joined campaigners in a high court bid to block the introduction of accountable care organisations to oversee local services without primary legislation, arguing they could lead to privatisation, rationing and charging.

meanwhile, the shadow health secretary, jon ashworth, has tabled a commons early day motion after the government announced plans to amend regulations to support the operation of accountable care organisations. ashworth argues that they are a profound change to the nhs that should be debated in parliament.


labour demands commons vote on 'secret' plan for nhs
 read more
accountable care – a term imported from the us, where it plays a key role in obamacare – can take many forms, but it typically involves an alliance of providers with a fixed budget collaborating to manage the health needs of their local population. nhs england wants to see sustainability and transformation partnerships (stps) evolving into accountable care systems in which integrated care supports good physical and mental health.

in june, nhs england announced that eight areas would be leading the accountable care drive. greater manchester is also adopting this approach, and many others are starting to use the accountable care language.

accountable care has the potential to address many of the criticisms the most vociferous supporters of the nhs have made for many years. it goes a long way to replace competition with collaboration, and the nhs england chief executive, simon stevens, said it could mark the end of the infamous purchaser/provider split, which weighs down the health service with costly and often pointless bureaucracy.

locally led, integrated systems are essential if we are going to shift the nhs from a 1970s-style hospital service to one that provides a community-based health and wellbeing service. pooling budgets across the local area is not a ruse to disguise cuts. it is the most effective way to manage public money, irrespective of the level of funding.

the court case confuses the issue of how the nhs is organised with its funding and the role of the private sector. these are three different issues.

but the legal basis for accountable care is shaky. faced with the wreckage left by andrew lansley’s infamous 2012 reforms, nhs england introduced stps because trying to plan services through more than 200 clinical commissioning groups was never going to work.

 us lessons: what the nhs can learn from accountable care organisations
dr mark zezza
 read more
as demand climbed, funding flatlined in the aftermath of the 2008 crash and managing long-term conditions became the dominant challenge; it was imperative to move from competition to collaboration and set a long-term goal of population health management. that is where accountable care comes in.

stps and accountable care are operating under legislation meant for clinical commissioning groups – so collaborative systems typically serving 1.2 million people in which local government and all parts of the nhs have a say are underpinned by a legal framework for gp-managed competition overseeing populations of 250,000.

advertisement

this is such a precarious legal balancing act that the 2017 conservative manifesto promised to tidy up the legislation and regulations. but introducing an nhs bill now would be political harakiri for theresa may, and most health service staff would prefer legal ambiguity to yet another round of organisational upheaval that would inevitably follow legislation.

so the choice is to either continue to find legal bodges to allow the nhs to collaborate and plan or – if the high court challenge succeeds – to return to the lansley dream-turned-nightmare of full-blooded competition.

but although the thinking behind the legal challenge is muddled, that campaign and labour’s early day motion highlight the major problem: a profound change in the management and leadership of the nhs is being introduced without informed public and parliamentary discussion.

the new approach has many strengths, but introducing it under the radar only serves to feed anxieties and misconceptions about the objective. nhs england needs to get the discussion about accountable care out in the open.

the royle family actor has challenged the health secretary to a debate, james o'brien says they can use his studio.

jeremy hunt has found himself embroiled in an unusual twitter spat with ralf little and stephen hawking.

the comedy actor instigated the row with the health secretary by accusing him of knowingly lying on the andrew marr show over the state of nhs mental healthcare.

 
 
the andrew marr show
✔
@marrshow
what has actually happened on my watch is the biggest expansion of mental health provision in europe says @jeremy_hunt #marr

9:53 am - oct 29, 2017
 487 487 replies   127 127 retweets   158 158 likes
twitter ads info and privacy
little has since retracted the knowingly aspect of his allegation, admitting he made it in the heat of the moment, but he still insists the cabinet minister was presenting the public with incorrect statistics.

regardless, it was enough to ensnare hunt. he hit little back, citing three statistics alleged to support his case that britain has seen the biggest expansion of mental health provision in europe.

29 oct

ralf little
✔
@ralflittle
this is what it looks like when a man goes on tv and knowingly lies to the public. if i’m wrong @jeremy_hunt, sue me. i double dare you. https://twitter.com/marrshow/status/924574799736664066 …

 
jeremy hunt
✔
@jeremy_hunt
4,300 more employed by mental health trusts, 2,700 more employed in talking therapies, 1400 more people treated every day since 2010. isn’t it ur job 2 find a major european country that’s done better and faster rather than make assertions you can’t support? i double dare you

11:53 am - nov 8, 2017
 251 251 replies   18 18 retweets   30 30 likes
twitter ads info and privacy
what followed was a 40 tweet rebuttal thread, featuring statistics from the independent fact-checking charity full fact.

little told james he debunked two of hunt's claims and actually bolstered one, the health secretary having undersold his achievement.

it has been shared more than 20,000 times.

the actor, who has starred in the royle family and two pints of lager and a packet of crisps, also challenged hunt to a debate over the nhs' mental healthcare provision. he said the aim wouldn't be to score points, believing the nhs transcends party politics, but to have a transparent discussion.

little envisages a discussion with a team of fact checkers, as well as a few junior doctors in attendance to provide first hand evidence.

it might be why hunt has so far not taken up the offer, last month he had to retract a claim to parliament about increasing the number of mental health workers by 30,000 - 43 times the actual figure.

james even offered his studio to host the argumentative duo: it's hd ready, go viral all the time these days.

little feels hunt is ducking him with semantic arguments, he said: now what's happened is this. jeremy hunt is being chased on twitter: 'when are you going to debate ralf? when are you going to talk to ralf?'

what he's now doing is saying 'even though i said i'd meet with ralf, and his fact checkers and junior doctors, i only said i would do that if ralf could prove his claim that i knowingly lied.'

it's getting extremely semantic, extremely technical and it may even be legally sound.

this man, who is a clever politician and knows how to produce stats and facts, is obfuscating and avoiding a serious discussion about the nhs, mental health and the future of the nhs.

off the basis of a semantic argument, and a technicality, and i don't think that's reasonable. i think people deserve better, i think they should know.

the government has triggered a row with nhs staff by unveiling plans to overhaul their pay, including how much they receive for working antisocial shifts.

health unions have warned jeremy hunt that he is risking a repeat of the acrimonious junior doctors’ dispute by seeking to reduce the extra amounts staff get for weekend and overnight working.

the health secretary has also aroused anger by making it clear that he wants to change increments – extra cash staff receive that helps increase their take-home pay.

unions voiced their opposition after hunt disclosed his intentions in an interview with the health service journal, saying he wanted to change the way more than 1 million nhs personnel in england are paid by introducing a “more professional pay structure”.


guardian today: the headlines, the analysis, the debate - sent direct to you
 read more
staff affected by any shake-up include nurses, midwives, radiographers, therapists and dozens of other types of health professionals whose pay is set under a system called agenda for change.

the chancellor, philip hammond, said in the budget last week that the government would provide money to fund a pay rise next year above the 1% planned, but only in return for productivity improvements.

hunt prompted particular suspicion by telling the journal the contract imposed on england’s 55,000 junior doctors in 2016 after a bitter year-long dispute, which prompted eight walkouts by trainee medics, was “quite sensible”. he suggested it could be a basis for the revised contract he wants to see, with those who work more regularly at weekends receiving higher pay.

“across the public sector we have been wanting to move towards more professional pay structures. i think the biggest area that we have wanted to reform for a long time is the system of increments – in particular, payments that simply relate to time served rather than any measurable increase in professional abilities,” he said.

advertisement


–– advertisement ––



ministers do not want to reduce the overall nhs pay bill, he insisted. “this isn’t a money-saving thing but about moving to modern professional pay structures,” hunt said.

but the royal college of nursing, which represents more than 300,000 nurses, accused him of being “ill-briefed on the increments system”.

“they are not automatic and recognise career progression, not simply time in a post,” a spokesperson said. the union welcomed the intention of maintaining antisocial hours payments, but warned hunt: “we will not support any reduction in terms and conditions.”

sara gorton, the head of health at the unison union, said: “if the government is expecting staff to pay for their own wage rise, it’ll be a very short set of talks indeed.”

jon skewes, a senior official at the royal college of midwives, said hunt had ignored advice unions gave him in a recent initial round of discussions about nhs pay “to explore more and talk less”.

“his intervention has not helped the prospect of a deal on pay in the nhs. last week’s budget was helpful on funding, but the secretary of state, by citing the junior doctors’ dispute, has blundered,” he said.

“[the rcm] will not be prepared to reduce the fair compensation that midwives and other staff in the nhs receive for providing a service that is there every day, every night, every weekend, every bank holiday, every christmas holiday.”

jonathan ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “alarm bells will be ringing loudly following this admission from jeremy hunt that he’s seeking to apply the junior doctors’ dispute as a template for pay talks across the nhs.

“his confrontational approach to that contract led to the first junior doctor strike ever and created a huge amount of worry and uncertainty for patients while the dispute was resolved.”

health unions want a pay rise of 3.9% next year, plus a further £800 to help make up for the erosion of their income over the past seven years of pay freezes and the 1% cap.

but the role of the public sector in driving forward life science innovation must not be ignored. as greg clark himself notes in the foreword to the sector deal, the nhs is a prized national asset and a key factor behind the strength of the uk life sciences sector.

the nhs can create huge benefits for patients in the uk. the royal marsden nhs foundation trust recently led the clinical trial of breast cancer drug palbociclib in collaboration with the institute of cancer research. this meant that many woman gained early access to the drug as an experimental therapy and are continuing to enjoy the health benefits today.

the nhs is easily the pharmaceutical industry’s biggest customer, but there is lots of evidence that it isn’t getting a good deal at the moment.


this means that for every woman benefiting from experimental treatment on the nhs there are others unable to get the drugs they need – with one british woman forced last year to launch a crowdfunding campaign to afford her breast cancer treatment.

and the cumulative effect of this is crippling the finances of our health service. total nhs spend on medicines increased from 11 per cent to 15 per cent of its annual budget between 2011 and 2016 – a rise that is larger than the current nhs deficit.

the other way that the public sector contributes to innovation in life sciences is through direct spend on r&d. yet this often means that the public ends up paying twice for drugs – first to develop them, and then to purchase them at a premium.

a recent report from stopaids and global justice now shows that uk taxpayers’ investment in medical research has led to the creation of medicines the nhs has not been able to afford. last year alone the nhs spent £1bn on medicines which relied upon significant uk government funding for their development.

the current system provides neither accountability nor transparency. we don’t know how much the nhs is paying for many medicines. we don’t know how much is spent on r&d, or what contribution the public has made. many aspects of clinical trial evidence are still too opaque.

these aren’t new problems – but now that the government intends to take a greater role in the development of new medicines, we need greater clarity regarding how the public will benefit.

we need to understand the true costs of r&d in order to have the evidence to determine a fair price for medicines. and when the uk taxpayer invests in the development of a new medicine we need to ensure that mechanisms exist to guarantee those medicines can be accessed by patients on the nhs and across the developing world.

when the public sector contributes, it gets a share of the rewards – this should be the principle at the heart of life sciences innovation.

labour has already pledged to raise r&d spending to 3 per cent of gdp as part of our industrial strategy. we want everyone to reap the benefits of new research, and as part of this we are developing proposals to ensure that the nhs doesn’t get a raw deal.

we’re building an innovation nation for the many, not the few.

new york is an american biweekly magazine concerned with life, culture, politics, and style generally, and with a particular emphasis on new york city. founded by milton glaser and clay felker in 1968 as a competitor to the new yorker, it was brasher and less polite, and established itself as a cradle of new journalism.[2] over time, it became more national in scope, publishing many noteworthy articles on american culture by writers such as tom wolfe, jimmy breslin, nora ephron, john heilemann, frank rich, and rebecca traister.
in its 21st-century incarnation under editor-in-chief adam moss, the nation's best and most-imitated city magazine is often not about the city—at least not in the overcrowded, traffic-clogged, five-boroughs sense, wrote then washington post media critic howard kurtz, as the magazine has increasingly published political and cultural stories of national significance.[3]
since its redesign and relaunch in 2004, the magazine has won more national magazine awards than any other publication, including the 2013 award for magazine of the year.[4] it was one of the first dual-audience lifestyle magazines, and its format and style have been emulated by some other american regional city publications.
in 2009, its paid and verified circulation was 408,622, with 95.8% of that coming from subscriptions. its websites—nymag.com, vulture.com, the cut, and grub street—receive visits from more than 14 million users per month

he 1936 movie beloved enemy is a fictionalised account of collins's life. unlike the real michael collins, the fictionalised dennis riordan (played by brian aherne) is shot, but recovers. hang up your brightest colours, a british documentary by kenneth griffith, was made for itv in 1973, but refused transmission. it was eventually screened by the bbc in wales in 1993 and across the united kingdom the following year.
in 1969, dominic behan wrote an episode of the uk television series play for today entitled 'michael collins'. the play dealt with collins' attempt to take the gun out of irish politics and took the perspective of the republican argument. at the time of writing the script, the troubles had just begun in northern ireland and the bbc were reluctant to broadcast the production. an appeal by the author to david attenborough (director of programming for the bbc at that time) resulted in the play eventually being broadcast; attenborough took the view that the imperatives of free speech could not be compromised in the cause of political expediency.
an irish documentary made by colm connolly for rté television in 1989 called the shadow of béal na bláth covered collins's death. a made-for-tv film, the treaty, was produced in 1991 and starred brendan gleeson as collins and ian bannen as david lloyd george. in 2007, rté produced a documentary entitled get collins, about the intelligence war which took place in dublin.[131][132]
collins was the subject of director neil jordan's 1996 film michael collins, with liam neeson in the title role. collins's great-grandnephew, aengus o'malley, played a student in a scene filmed in marsh's library.
in 2005 cork opera house commissioned a musical drama about collins.[133] michael collins by brian flynn had a successful run in 2009 at cork opera house and later in the olympia theatre in dublin.
infamous assassinations, a 2007 british documentary television series, devoted its eighth episode to the death of collins.

mcconnochie was born in armidale, new south wales and raised in adelaide, south australia. she has a phd in english literature from the university of sydney.
mcconnochie's novels have grappled with questions about celebrity and the possibilities open to women and women artists. the first, coldwater, transplants the brontë sisters to a penal colony off the coast of new south wales, using their plight to explore different approaches to art, life and love. it was shortlisted in the best first book (se asia and pacific region) category for the commonwealth writers prize,[citation needed] and was named by the washington post as one of the books of the year.[citation needed]
her second novel, the snow queen is set in adelaide and tells the story of a former russian ballerina stranded in post-war australia. it saw mcconnochie voted one of the best young australian novelists by the sydney morning herald.[citation needed]
her third novel, fivestar focuses on contemporary notions of celebrity, charting the rise and fall of an antipodean girl group reminiscent of the spice girls.
melissa, queen of evil, her first novel for children, won the 2006 aurealis award for best children's novel.

yorke attended newcastle university.[4] he joined the bbc in 1986, working initially in radio as a studio manager and then as a producer on bbc radio 5. [5]
in 1994, he moved to television, working as a script editor on eastenders before becoming storyline consultant on casualty. in 1999, after a brief period as producer on sunburn [6] starring michelle collins[6], he took on the executive producer role on eastenders.[7] during his time there, he was given the task of introducing the soap's fourth weekly episode and managed a win over long-running rival coronation street in a rare head-to-head showdown.[citation needed]
he axed the majority of the di marco family and helped introduce popular characters such as the slater family.[7] as what mal young described as two of eastenders most successful years, yorke was responsible for big ratings winners such as who shot phil?, ethel skinner's death, jim branning and dot cotton's marriage, abusive trevor morgan, and kat slater's revelation to her daughter zoe that she was her mother.[7] yorke was also responsible for kim medcalf being cast in the role of sam mitchell in january 2002, after danniella westbrook's drug addiction left her unsuitable for the role.[7]
in may 2002 he left the soap for a senior position under mal young in the bbc's in-house drama series team, but soon after he left to work for channel 4 as the head of drama in 2003. [8] there he commissioned successful shows such as shameless, sex traffic and the acclaimed omagh.[3]in 2005 it was announced he would return to the bbc, taking over mal young's position, as controller of bbc drama series, and, in addition, co-head of independent drama commissioning (i.e. programmes made for the bbc by independent production companies, rather than in-house).[8]
one of the reasons he returned was to set around reversing the fortunes of eastenders, which had been receiving low ratings in comparison to the past. the results were mixed. as controller of continuing drama series, he has been ultimately responsible for overseeing some of the most popular programmes on british television, including eastenders, casualty, holby city and doctors.

home and away fans have been waiting for kat's final scenes to air since august, after paparazzi pictures showed the cast filming the policewoman's funeral.

sadly, it looks like kat's days really are numbered now as a horror car crash airing on monday (december 18) will leave one character dead.


the tragedy follows a shock discovery for kat as she finally realises that her boyfriend robbo isn't the man he claims to be.

after kat confronts robbo with some very incriminating evidence, he takes terrifying action to avoid being arrested — kidnapping both her and tori morgan.

with kat's ex-boyfriend ash willing to go to desperate lengths to protect her and their unborn baby, a devastating sequence of events ultimately leads to a fatal accident where one resident will lose their life.

prior to the accident, kat does actually manage to escape from robbo's clutches – but unfortunately, tori isn't so lucky.

robbo considers leaving kat chapman in home and away
faced with an impossible dilemma, kat has to decide whether to report robbo to the police or try and rescue tori herself. 
but sadly, it looks like her final decision could have deadly consequences...

fans will have to tune in to find out what exactly happens, but one thing is for sure, summer bay will never be the same again.

jake ryan – who plays robbo – said to tv week: robbo is in too far now. he'll do whatever he possibly can – or he's going to go away [to jail] for a long time.

robbo would be devastated if he lost kat, he truly loves her. but his past is catching up with him.

home and away is now on its christmas break on channel 5 in the uk and will be off air for six weeks.

dexter is an american television crime drama mystery series that aired on showtime from october 1, 2006, to september 22, 2013.[1] set in miami, the series centers on dexter morgan (michael c. hall), a forensic technician specializing in blood spatter pattern analysis for the fictional miami metro police department, who leads a secret parallel life as a vigilante serial killer, hunting down murderers who have slipped through the cracks of the justice system. the show's first season was derived from the novel darkly dreaming dexter (2004), the first of the dexter series novels by jeff lindsay. it was adapted for television by screenwriter james manos, jr., who wrote the first episode. subsequent seasons evolved independently of lindsay's works.
in february 2008, reruns (edited down to a tv-14 rating) began to air on cbs in the wake of the shortage of original programming ensuing from the 2007–2008 writers guild of america strike, thus the reruns on cbs ended after one run of the first season. the series has enjoyed mostly positive reviews throughout its run and popularity, including four consecutive primetime emmy nominations for best drama series starting in season two. season four aired its season finale on december 13, 2009, to a record-breaking audience of 2.6 million viewers, making it the most-watched original series episode ever on showtime at that time.[2][3]
in april 2013, showtime announced that season eight would be the final season of dexter.[4] the season-eight premiere was the most watched dexter episode with more than 3 million viewers total for all airings that night.[5] the original broadcast of the series finale—shown at 9 pm on september 22, 2013—drew 2.8 million viewers, the largest overall audience in showtime's history.

councils are expected by the government to be largely self-financing. the government has steadily removed hypothecated funding for child social care, and for safeguarding children from abuse or neglect. historically, councils had to send business rate revenue to the government, while the government provided a large grant to councils based on need. under the cameron ministry, the business rate system was changed, so that councils keep 50% of the revenue; the central government grant was correspondingly reduced, and hypothecated streams merged into the general grant. the central grant has continued to fall, and shortly councils will retain 100% of business rate revenue. the grant has also fallen due to school funding being transferred directly to new academy schools, and housing benefit (paid via the council) being replaced by centrally paid universal credit.

the government has steadily cut funding for child social care. there is less money for children with disabilities, there is also less for children at risk of abuse or neglect. according to an inquiry into child social care in england nearly 90% of directors of children’s services say they now find fulfilling their legal duties to children in need of support increasingly hard. that involves keeping a child developing, healthy and safe. the national children’s bureau, which did the inquiry stated, “they’re being asked to do more with less. something has to give.” parents of sick children who need respite care now get less. some children are not getting protection against being abused or neglected. welfare cuts and increased poverty have increased the numbers of children in need while resources are falling. early intervention services have been cut because the government is not providing funding for this. families on the breadline can get less help feeding their children and evicted families can get less help being passed to homeless charities. maintained nurseries are being shut and youth mental health services are being cut. councils facing 20% cuts to funding must focus resources on children who are already suffering and there is less for preventative measures like spotting domestic violence in a family. when authorities eventually are involved the situation may need the child being taken into care. children taken into care have increased by 17%. this is considered inhuman and is also a false economy as the cost of keeping a teenager in care is far higher than the cost of mentoring the family so the youngster can stay with its family. due to this money spent on the average child in need has increased over the years.[54] there are fears children's social services will reach breaking point.”[55]

meanwhile, migration from the eu has drastically increaased the number of young families. the national children’s bureau, stated, that nearly 90% of directors of children's services in england say they now find fulfilling their legal obligations increasingly hard, and complained that “they’re being asked to do more with less. something has to give.”

many sure start centres have been closed. however, councils continue to provide their statutory obligations which were delivered at sure start centres, but do so elsewhere; the rental and maintenance costs of modern, well-located, spacious, buildings in which the sure start services are located is one of the main reason cited for choosing to closing such centres. preventative measures - like spotting domestic violence in a family - continue to be undertaken by health visitors, and there are an increasing number of them; health visitors now spend more time visiting, as they did historically, rather than get visited.

nevertheless, the loss of sure start centres is not without significant political criticism. alison michalska of the 'association of directors of children’s services' said, “we cannot go on as we are. local authorities know that a strong local early-intervention offer can reduce the need for more intrusive and costly interventions in the lives of children and families once problems have worsened and reached crisis point, yet councils have been left with no choice but to reduce these services in order to cope with rising demand. local authorities have worked hard to make savings, but we are running out of options.”[55]

children with life threatening and life limiting conditions sometimes need to access support at any time of day or night but cannot get that support. parents who are not expert clinicians have to deal with complex medical conditions themslves or call a&e.

uk social workers are currently registered with the health professions council which sets codes of conduct and practice. through the work of the munro review, the social work reform board and the piloting of social work practices, government aims to give greater autonomy to social workers. the reform board recommended the development of a professional college. the college of social work has been set up with the aim of improving and supporting social work by leading the development of the profession and representing it in discussions with organisations that regulate, train, work with, and are affected by social work. social care services are regulated by the care quality commission.

other social care organisations include the social care institute for excellence - an independent charity that identifies and transfers knowledge about good practice, and skills for care, the national lead agency for policy and strategy related to workforce development and the adult social care workforce.

the national skills academy for social care, launched in 2009, provides learning support and training practice for social care workers and employers in england with a specific remit on leadership development.

the association of directors of adult social services is the official voice of senior social care managers in england.

there are many other voluntary and independent organisations that exist to support the delivery of social care. these exist to support both the social care workforce and people who use services, and include user-led organisations.

421 care home businesses have gone out of business from 2010 to 2017. this covers nursing homes, homes for the elderly, residential care activities for learning disabilities, mental health, and substance abuse. frp advisory claims care homes were the only uk industry that suffered rising insolvencies over the time period. there is pressure on care homes because councils have contributed less while costs, notably staff overheads rose. martin green of care england said, “my view is that if you ask me who is to blame, it is the government. the government should be delivering a very clear vision for what social care is, they should be giving clear expectations to citizens about what they should expect from the system and what they should expect to pay for. none of that is happening.” chris stevens of frp said, “the fall in sterling against the euro will exacerbate pre-existing pressure on staffing costs in a sector reliant on overseas workers to fill frontline staff vacancies, and where margins have come under increasing pressure from the rise in the minimum wage, pension costs and cuts in local authority funding. the care home sector is beleaguered due to all local authorities facing overall double-digit budget cuts for this current financial year under way and beyond.

botulism is caused by botulinum toxin, a poison produced by the bacterium clostridium botulinum. the organism is common in the soil and aquatic sediments and can survive in these environments as a resistant spore.

the 3 main types of botulism are:

foodborne botulism
intestinal botulism (which is due to proliferation of the organism in the gut)
wound botulism
symptoms often begin with blurred or double vision and difficulty in swallowing and speaking. in foodborne botulism there may also be diarrhoea and vomiting. the disease can progress to a more generalised paralysis that includes the arms, legs, trunk and respiratory muscles.

most cases make a full recovery, but the recovery period can be many months.the disease can be fatal in 5 to 10% of cases.

stance on brexit and its impact on wales[edit]
during the brexit referendum campaign davies suggested wales would be better off financially outside the eu: “wales could be as much as half a billion pounds a year better off if the uk votes to leave the european union.[3] however, shortly after the referendum, where a majority of 52.4 percent in wales voted for leaving the eu, conservative welsh secretary alun cairns stated that wales could not expect a brexit administration to match the level of funding it received from brussels at present. (i. e. £1.9 billion for the period 2014 to 2020).[4]

in the run-up to the uk's invocation of article 50 of the treaty on european union, davis claimed that the welsh government should be denied the right to be part of brexit negotiations on devolved areas.[5]

despite his firm anti-eu stance, davis' family firm tj davies and sons had accepted a total of £96,808.89 in eu subsidies over the period october 16, 2013 to october 15, 2014 alone, including £70,930.63 allocated under the single area payment scheme, £24,099.86 agro-environmental payments and £1,728.40 from the first afforestation of agricultural land scheme.[6] commenting on the revelation of these figures britain stronger in europe spokesman james mcgrory said: taking money from europe while saying we should leave is hypocrisy of the first order.

although it is commonly believed that the australian government's initial involvement in sports was prompted by the country's poor performance at the 1976 montreal olympic games in which australia failed to win a gold medal, the government actually began initial investigations into its potential role in sports in 1973.[1] it was at this time that the government commissioned professor john bloomfield to prepare a sports plan for the country. his report, the role, scope and development of recreation in australia, was based on studies of sports institutes in europe and their success in developing elite athletes. bloomfield suggested to the government that it should establish a national institute of sport similar to those operating in european countries.[2]
following receipt of the report, the minister for tourism and recreation, frank stewart, appointed a study group (chaired by dr allan coles) to report on the feasibility of establishing a sports institute in australia. the coles report was released in 1975 and recommended the establishment of the institute.[1]
although the recommendation to establish the institute was made in 1975, it was not until 1981 that the institute was established. the delay in establishing the institute is commonly considered to be a combination of poor support for australian sport following the 1976 montreal olympics and the uneasiness between the australian olympic federation (now the australian olympic committee) and the government. this uneasiness was caused over the federation ignoring the government's request to boycott the 1980 moscow olympic games because of russia's invasion of afghanistan.
the bloomfield and coles reports, however, were not lost on bob ellicott, the minister for home affairs and environment. buoyed by the concept of a national sports institute during a trip to china and keen to bridge the gap between government and sport, in 1980 ellicott and his staff offered the coles report as a model plan for australia.[1] the plan would allow athletes to train and develop in australia rather than be forced overseas. ellicott's vision was well received and on australia day, 26 january 1981, the ais was officially opened by prime minister malcolm fraser. renowned swim coach, don talbot was appointed as the institute's first director.[1] with the institute established, the commonwealth government had begun its significant involvement in australian sport.[1]
the australian labor party in its 1983 election sport policy recommended the establishment of a sports commission to provide a more co-ordinated approach to sport.[3] in 1984, an interim committee report recommended its establishment. the australian sports commission was formally established by the australian sports commission act 1985. [1] in august 1987, the australian government formalised their decision to rationalise federal assistance to australian sport and the australian institute of sport merged with the australian sports commission, which was to be the agency responsible for general sports participation as well as high performance sport.

in humans the bladder is a hollow muscular organ situated at the base of the pelvis. urine collects in the bladder, fed from the two ureters that connect the bladder with the kidneys. urine leaves the bladder via the urethra, a single muscular tube which ends in an opening – the urinary meatus, where it exits the body.
anatomists divide the bladder into:.[3]
a broad fundus
a body
an apex
a neck
the apex (prev.vertex) is directed forward toward the upper part of the pubic symphysis, and from there the median umbilical ligament continues upward on the back of the anterior abdominal wall to the umbilicus. the peritoneum is carried by it from the apex on to the abdominal wall to form the middle umbilical fold.
the neck of the bladder is the area at the base of the trigone that surrounds the internal urethral orifice that leads to the urethra.[3] in males the neck of the urinary bladder is adjacent to the prostate gland.
the three openings, two ureteric orifices, and the internal urethral orifice mark the triangular area called the trigone of the bladder. these openings have mucosal flaps in front of them that act as valves in preventing the backflow of urine into the ureters,[4] known as vesicoureteral reflux. between the two ureteric openings is a raised area of tissue called the interureteric crest.[3] this makes the upper boundary of the trigone. the trigone is a smooth-muscle area that forms the floor of the bladder above the urethra.[5] it is an area of smooth tissue for the easy flow of urine into and from this part of the bladder - in contrast to the irregular surface formed by the rugae.
in men, the prostate gland lies outside the opening for the urethra. the middle lobe of the prostate causes an elevation in the mucous membrane behind the internal urethral orifice called the uvula of urinary bladder. the uvula can enlarge when the prostate becomes enlarged.
the bladder is situated below the peritoneal cavity near the pelvic floor and behind the pubic symphysis. in men, it lies in front of the rectum, separated by the recto-vesical pouch, and is supported by fibres of the levator ani and of the prostate gland. in women, it lies in front of the uterus, separated by the vesico-uterine pouch, and is supported by the elevator ani and the upper part of the vagina. the wall of the urinary bladder is normally 3–5 mm thick.[6] when well distended, the wall is normally less than 3 mm.[6]
the inner walls have a series of ridges, thick mucosal folds known as rugae that allow for the expansion of the bladder.
the latin phrase for urinary bladder is vesica urinaria, and the term vesical or prefix vesico - appear in connection with associated structures such as vesical veins. the modern latin word for bladder - cystis - appears in associated terms such as cystitis (inflammation of the bladder).

background[edit]
davies was educated at llanfair primary school, st john's preparatory school, porthcawl, and later boarded at wycliffe college, stroud. he is married to a qualified midwife and they have four children.[1] he is a partner in the family farming business based in st hilary near cowbridge in the vale of glamorgan. davies was a welsh delegate on the council of the national farmers union (nfu); vice president of the local young farmers club; and is a former chairman of creative communities, which seeks to develop structural community development. davies is also a life governor of the royal welsh agricultural society, and was the society’s oxford scholar in 2002. he is a former governor at llanfair primary school.[citation needed]

political career[edit]
joining the conservative party in 1997, davies fought cardiff west in the 2001 general election, and brecon and radnorshire in 2005. he has served as deputy chairman (political) for the conservative party in south wales central 2002–03, a region that comprises cardiff, rhondda cynon taff and the vale of glamorgan; and cardiff west conservative association 2004–05. in 2007, he was elected to the national assembly of wales. davies' political interests include education, health and rural affairs.

in the third assembly he was appointed shadow minister for transport in the national assembly for wales from 7 july 2007 to 16 june 2008, and shadow minister for education, lifelong learning and skills from 16 june 2008. he also sits on the assembly’s petitions committee, which reviews petitions from members of the public, as well as sitting on the subordinate legislation committee. in 2009 he became the shadow minister for health in the national assembly for wales. he has also won an award for being assembly member to watch in december 2008. he was elected as leader of the welsh conservative group on the 14 july 2011, having won 53.1 per cent of the vote.

the persian gulf is also home to many migratory and local birds. there is great variation in color, size, and type of the bird species that call the gulf home. one bird in particular, the kalbaensis subspecies of the collared kingfishers is at the brink of extinction due to real state development by cities such as dubai and countries such as oman.[62] estimates from 2006 showed that only three viable nesting sites were available for this ancient bird, one located 80 miles (129 km) from dubai, and two smaller sites in oman, all of which are in the process of becoming real estate developments.[62] such expansion would prove devastating and could cause this species to become extinct. unfortunately for the kingfisher, a u.n. plan to protect the mangroves as a biological reserve was blatantly ignored by the emirate of sharjah, which allowed the dredging of a channel that bisects the wetland and construction of an adjacent concrete walkway.[62] environmental watchdogs in arabia are few, and those that do advocate the wildlife are often silenced or ignored by developers of real estate, most of whom have royal family connections and huge energy profits to invest.[62] the end result has been sacrifice of a beautiful yet delicate ecology that has been in harmony for hundreds of years, for structures that are erected only a few years, yet will have a lasting detrimental effect.
almost no species in the persian gulf is spared from the real estate development of uae and oman, including the hawksbill turtle, greater flamingo, and booted warbler, mainly due to destruction of the mangrove habitats to make way for towers, hotels, and luxury resorts.[62][63] even dolphins that frequent the gulf in northern waters, around iran are at serious risk. recent statistics and observations show that dolphins are at danger of entrapment in purse seine fishing nets and exposure to chemical pollutants; perhaps the most alarming sign is the mass suicides committed by dolphins off iran's hormozgan province, which are not well understood, but are suspected to be linked with a deteriorating marine environment from water pollution from oil, sewage, and industrial run offs

the geography of wales means that there are areas where cross-border arrangements are necessary. the population of north wales is too small to support specialist units, so patients travel to liverpool and manchester. there are no large hospitals in mid wales at all. more than 31,000 welsh patients were treated in english hospitals in 2013/4.[15] in october 2014 jeremy hunt claimed that english hospitals close to the welsh border were under absolutely intolerable pressure and that people were fleeing the second class health service in wales.[16]

the entitlement to free prescription charges is based on the gp with which a patient is registered, so some patients who live in england benefit from them.
a clade (from ancient greek: κλάδος, klados, branch) is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants, and represents a single branch on the tree of life.[1]
the common ancestor may be an individual, a population, a species (extinct or extant), and so on right up to a kingdom. clades are nested, one in another, as each branch in turn splits into smaller branches. these splits reflect evolutionary history as populations diverged and evolved independently. clades are termed monophyletic (greek: one clan) groups.
over the last few decades, the cladistic approach has revolutionized biological classification and revealed surprising evolutionary relationships among organisms.[2] increasingly, taxonomists try to avoid naming taxa that are not clades; that is, taxa that are not monophyletic.[citation needed] some of the most interesting revelations on the relationships between organisms that the molecular biology arm of cladistics has revealed are that fungi are closer relatives to animals than they are to plants, archaea are now considered different from bacteria, and multicellular organisms may have evolved from archaea
university college london hospitals nhs foundation trust complained in june 2015 that commissioners outside england use a burdensome prior approval process, where a funding agreement is needed before each stage of treatment. at the end of 2014–15 the trust was owed more than £2.3m for treating patients from outside england. a survey by the health service journal suggested there was £21m of outstanding debt relating to patients from the devolved nations treated in the last three years, against total invoicing of £315m by english nhs trusts.

work for us
our success is measured by the quality of our patients' experience. when you join us, you will play a vital role in moving our organisation forward and maintaining our reputation for excellence in patient care.

you can apply for a job with us through our website or nhs jobs.

why choose us
we aim to be one of the employers of choice in berkshire and are committed to compassionate care for all our patients. our values underpin all we do.

we've recently been rated as ‘good’ by cqc for the range of mental health and community services we provide. working in partnership with patients and their families is really important to us as this helps us to provide the best care in the right place.

throughout your career with us, you'll be supported in your continuing professional learning and development.

staff benefits
we strive to build a great working culture, where people are valued. we listen to our staff and encourage them to give and receive feedback. we also offer a number of benefits to help everyone maintain a good work-life balance, including:

wexham park hospital is located approximately two miles north of slough town centre on the corner of wexham street and church lane/wexham park lane.

our car park is often very busy and we ask that wherever possible you travel to your appointment or visit the hospital by public transport to ease pressure, avoid congestion and any delay to your appointment.
improving access with group consultations for diabetes in slough
case study summary
group consultations replace routine one-to-one appointments for diabetic patients. this results in gp or a practice nurse practitioner being able to see up to 12 patients in 40‐60 minutes. this potentially doubles productivity and access to routine care and follow up appointments.

 

as part of the gp access fund scheme in slough, a number of practices, working with the experience led care programme (elc) have been supporting five practices in slough to prepare and run group consultations. several are now well on their way to applying group consultations as part of routine general practice.

group consultations ‐ also called shared medical appointments, group medical appointments or group appointments ‐ are medical appointments delivered by a clinician in a supportive peer group setting. they are not an addition to routine one-to-one appointments. they replace routine one to one appointments. this means that the gp or practice nurse practitioner can see up to 12 patients in 40‐60 minutes. this potentially doubles productivity and access to routine care and follow up appointments.

impact
after the first four months, the five practices reported positive changes, and a further seven local practices have expressed an interest in joining the project. gps have enjoyed working in this way, and there has been very positive feedback from patients. both report that they are managing to discuss important issues they don’t normally include in consultations. the group consultation approach is proving applicable to patients from s asian backgrounds as well as white british people, and early feedback indicates it may actually work best for people with the most complex needs and those who are poorly compliant with monitoring traditionally.

tips for adoption
gps often have a number of concerns about the feasibility and suitability of this approach. consider booking a few trial sessions with expert facilitation before seeking commitment to shift to this model in the longer term.

my career in general practice opened up a world of possibilities
case study summary
prof val wass’s career spanned over four decades. she looks back at her experiences and outlines some of the issues facing general practice today.

 

at the start of her medical career, val wass never imagined that she would amass such a range of experiences or such a lengthy cv. medical school 50 years ago was a hugely different era; the specialty a doctor trained in was a career for life. “you imagined being in a job for the rest of your career,” she says. there weren’t many women practising medicine, and there was very little exposure to primary care.

her proudest achievements include her appointment as head of the school of medicine at keele university and becoming the first woman elected to the medical schools council executive. she has worked in more than 25 countries, chaired the royal college of general practitioners international committee for six years, and for 10 years led a college project to develop accreditation of family medicine doctors across south asia.

she has had the model “portfolio career”, where doctors choose to move away from the traditional one job for life, but instead have a portfolio of employments, inside and outside of clinical practice.

she started her career in medical research in paediatric renal medicine before later moving to adult care. it was during this time she realised she wanted to be a holistic doctor. “looking after chronic patients, you begin to realise that it’s not just about their illness – they’ve other concerns; whether they can have children, their ability to work, their family,” she says.

it was this desire to care holistically for patients and their families that brought wass into general practice, a specialty she would practice in for the rest of her career. she loved being a gp, and says she heard many interesting stories from patients. “you’re holding all these little confidences and you feel so privileged that people are sharing their lives with you.”

looking back, wass says she didn’t expect that a career in general practice would also “open up a whole world”. the flexibility it offered allowed her to seize new opportunities, including a move to london as a senior lecturer in primary care, where she worked in a medical school and helped raise the standard of inner city general practice. a move to manchester followed, where wass helped to shape the curriculum and assessment of medical students with a focus on training more in the community, among other roles.

“being a gp really helped me transfer into these roles,” says wass. “you were able to put the patient narrative much more into everything you did. you can put the gp experience into exams for example, so that doctors see the patient in their own environment.”

despite these opportunities, wass believes general practice is still looked down upon, posing its biggest challenge. “it’s really hard to get primary care valued by other doctors … but the truth is that with co-morbidity, an ageing population, the complexities of a modern day population, general practice really will need the brightest doctors.”

to help improve this, wass has led on work at keele university to help students and academics realise just how important general practice is, including introducing gp role models and encouraging medical students to balance their practice with academic research. however, she believes that more needs to be done to raise primary care’s status and is working with health education england to report on how general practice is perceived as a career in medical schools.

she argues that as primary care is changing, what doctors want from their future has changed. “the thing that is putting them off from general practice is the thought of doing the same thing for their entire life – you can’t tell young people that they need permanence. they’re looking at working for a long time and they want flexibility to follow their own career path, and often to change course along the way.”

this, she believes, is where general practice is letting itself down – for many, particularly grassroots gps, general practice is a career for life. there should be more flexibility both in being able to develop skills in other specialties and allowing doctors to enter general practice when they are more mature and feel ready to deal with the challenges of primary care.

“you don’t have to go straight into it. as a gp, anything could happen; it can be very challenging and requires a special personality, often an individual type of personality,” she says.

“not everyone can do it. my experience of research and other training really prepared me for general practice. there’s nothing wrong with doing something first, to get your confidence up and build up your maturity – we should be embracing that.”

doctors in training should also be encouraged to take up the opportunities that general practice offers because it is flexible and allows doctors to build their own portfolio career: “i love general practice, really enjoyed it, but a portfolio career gave me flexibility, to be always able to do different things and keep the balance right.”

“if i had one piece of advice to foundation doctors, it would be to think about your whole career, one that allows you to seize opportunities and follow your own interests. think big.”

new models of care – livewell south west
case study summary
a new model service designed, to improve quality of care for patients in nursing and residential homes. the service will deliver a weekly clinical pharmacist visit to each home along with a joint gp/pharmacist visit every four weeks.

 

evidence shows that care home residents are among the most vulnerable people in our society with complex needs that often include multiple long term conditions and advanced frailty which cannot be met by primary care within the gms contract to the level required to ensure good quality of care. care home residents are unable to attend their local pharmacy for treatment of minor ailments, or attend their primary care practice, resulting in frequent visits to the care home from gps, with frequent and multiple prescribing interventions. they also have a higher than average use of emergency and urgent care services, including the south western ambulance service (swast) and devon doctors.

patients in nursing and residential homes are currently underserved within the current general practice contract.  gp care to residents in nursing and residential homes is often limited to visits on request, with little continuity of care.  each care home usually has residents registered with a variety of gp practices leading to fragmented inconsistent care. in addition, polypharmacy is often one of the main causes of emergency admissions. adverse drug events account for approximately 6.5% of all hospital admissions, but more in older people, leading to increased hospital stay and significant morbidity and mortality.

livewell proposed a change that challenged the current model, which recognised the vulnerability and heightened medical risk for this frail group of patients.

solution
a new model service has been designed, to improve quality of care for patients in nursing and residential homes. the service will deliver a weekly clinical pharmacist visit to each home along with a joint gp/pharmacist visit every four weeks.

the scope of the service includes the joint working innovation for care homes to address frailty and ensure effective prescribing. the model is for a multi-disciplinary integrated healthcare team to care for patients in nursing and residential homes in geographically-focused areas. it covers six homes with a combined bed total of 281..

the service provides proactive and responsive care, better supporting this vulnerable group in the following areas: promoting self-management where appropriate, optimising primary and secondary prevention interventions to avoid acute exacerbations where there is evidence to support this, and ensuring residents are treated symptomatically to maintain wellbeing. along with undertaking detailed medication reviews which will help to reduce admissions and aid the seamless transfer of care between care settings.

through planned and focused attendance at each care home by the ‘team’, a systematic approach to identifying residents who are at end of life will be developed, leading to appropriate support and care being implemented at the earliest opportunity. in addition, improved collaboration with older people’s mental health services will be encouraged to better support residents with dementia and other mental health conditions.

outcomes
the project is in an early stage of service delivery but  many benefits have already been realised by having the service in place, including:

improved medicines management
decrease in number of medications being prescribed
decrease in medication spend
improving transfer of medicines between primary and secondary care
undertaking timely follow up of patients
decrease in gp visits to care homes
increase in education and learning within the home from careworkers
early indication (after three months) has shown significant improvements in prescribing practice, and an increase in the prevalence of comprehensive care plans and treatment escalation plans. patients, families and care home staff are all highly engaged and are highly satisfied with the service. we hope that in time we can develop a sense of responsibility and ownership that will result in reduced falls and unplanned admissions.

tips for adoption
working at scale has made this service possible. partnership working and sharing resources and skills is essential for success. this has been evident between livewell south west and beacon medical group across a number of projects.

dr adam morris, medical director, livewell southwest said: “we know that care home residents are some of our most vulnerable patients and are particularly susceptible to side effects from complex prescribing regimes. we also know that care home medical cover can be reactive rather than proactive and that many residents are admitted to acute trusts due to medication problems. this proactive multi-professional approach helps minimise avoidable harm for these patients.

building resilience in general practice – st austell healthcare
case study summary
the closure of one general practice put significant pressureon the remaining three practices in the area. rather than struggling individually, the three practices merged to form one new sustainable, multi skilled primary care service.

 

in august 2014, the largest practice in st austell (polkyth) handed back their general medical services (gms) contract, leaving 8,000 patients without a gp. polkyth’s failure put significant pressure on the remaining three practices in the town.  for twelve months, those practices joined together to run polkyth using an alternative provider medical services (apms) contract and then, following  public consultation, the three practices  merged and all the polkyth patients were transferred to the new practice.

primary care services have now been redesigned for the 32,000 patients with an emphasis on upskilling a broad multidisciplinary team (mdt), collaborative working with community (nhs and non-nhs) partners, social care, the local acute trust and an out-of-hours (ooh) provider. they have improved access by running an acute care hub from the former polkyth site (open 8am-8pm monday to friday).

the merger has saved primary care in st austell from probable collapse. st austell healthcare now have a sustainable clinical and financial model that meets the demands on current primary care and is dynamic enough to embrace future change.

this innovative approach and ability to implement change has been recognised by the national association of primary care (napc) and they are currently one of 15 national test sites for the primary care home pilots.

st austell healthcare has changed the way it works through:

recruitment and upskilling of the clinical and non-clinical team
separating urgent and planned care
collaborative working with health and social care providers
a pioneering social prescribing scheme
staff wellbeing reviews
high-level financial modelling and advice from a dedicated finance consultant
streamlining back office functioning
implementation of systmone it clinical system across all five sites
new ophthalmology secondary care service for macular degeneration and glaucoma.
the offer of flexible working and portfolio careers for salaried gps hashelped with the demands of work and family life. st austell healthcare has managed to recruit successfully but their model is based on high patient to whole time equivalent (wte) numbers (approx. 2,900 patients/wte), they see investing in their mdt as the key to sustainable general practice in st austell.

the last 18 months in st austell have seen huge changes in general practice. st austell healthcare feel that the merger has allowed a redesign of their entire business and patient-care strategies.

dr stewart smith, gp partner said: “since the merger we have found recruitment easier, we can command higher standards from our management team, collaborative working has improved, we have developed new income streams and crucially our gps are happier and more positive about the future. we have regular visitors from all over the south west to look at our model and to discuss collaborative working. we are very happy to share learning with practices.

improving access with physiotherapy
broadening the workforce – using direct access to physiotherapy as an alternative to seeing a gp
case study summary
a musculoskeletal (msk) practitioner (senior physiotherapist), based in a practice, supplies brief interventions of assessment, advice and exercise.  a pilot, focusing on gp workload and therapy, looked at whether the role of the physiotherapist could help reduce the pressure on gp appointments and release time. alongside this
self-referral option which is face to face, patients can self-refer themselves for assessment and advice to a physiotherapy telephone service.

the idea
as an alternative to seeing their gp, patients were given the option to book themselves an assessment directly with the msk practitioner. this could take place either face to face or over the phone.  during the assessment the practitioner, where appropriate, was able to give:

advice and exercises along with a self-management plan – patients were advised to return to the practice if they felt no improvements
referral for further physiotherapy
referral to an appropriate service e.g. podiatry.
after emis (egton medical information systems) coding and searches proved unreliable, all gp consultations were investigated over a one week period for msk problems that could have been dealt with by the physiotherapist.  this led to the trial of a new self-referral system available to patients via telephone advice.

impact
the greatest impact has been patients being able to self-refer via telephone.

the baseline figure of msk cases seen by a gp as first point of contact was 14.5 per cent, on re-evaluation this reduced to over 50 per cent, the figure now stands at 6 per cent.  this suggests patients are choosing to self-refer through the telephone system rather than seeing their gp.  more recent data for early 2017, shows that only 2.75 per cent of gp workload each week is now msk, where self-referral over the phone has been successfully implemented.
referrals from the practice into the telephone assessment and advice service have doubled.
over 30% of patients calling in to the service are now dealt with over the telephone, resulting in no increase in waiting times for usual care physiotherapy.
the 20 minute, face to face, msk practitioner sessions are proving popular.  uptake has reached capacity in the practice with 66 per cent of patients dealt with in this single brief physiotherapy intervention.
early indications show that a physiotherapist can be a cost effective member to the practice workforce.  similar pilots in other practices have shown cost savings to local health economies in terms of prescribing and placing patients on the correct pathway of care, investigations and secondary care referral.  feedback from patients has also been positive.

“a sensible way forward to save gp time.”

“a lot better than seeing a doctor for my problem as it ‘cuts out the middleman’, it saves time for everyone and lets someone who really needs to see a doctor have the appointment.”

“a specialised service which could ease the workload on gps who are not able to be an expert in everything and will help patients.”

implementation tips
change your practice’s outgoing telephone message so patients are aware they can have quick and easy access to physiotherapy. this works best if one of the practice’s gps records it.  do as much marketing as possible. this is a new choice for patients and it will take time for the message to filter through, as it did with the role of advanced nurse practitioners.  continually promote the work with patient groups.